                                     380 BC

                                   PROTAGORAS

                                    by Plato

                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
PROTAGORAS

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES, who is the narrator of the
Dialogue to his Companion; HIPPOCRATES; ALCIBIADES; CRINAS;
PROTAGORAS, HIPPIAS, PRODICUS, Sophists; CALLIAS, a wealthy
Athenian. Scene: The House of Callias

  Com. Where do you come from, Socrates? And yet I need hardly ask the
question, for I know that you have been in chase of the fair
Alcibiades. I saw the day before yesterday; and he had got a beard
like a man-and he is a man, as I may tell you in your ear. But I
thought that he was still very charming.

  Soc. What of his beard? Are you not of Homer's opinion, who says

     Youth is most charming when the beard first appears?

And that is now the charm of Alcibiades.

  Com. Well, and how do matters proceed? Have you been visiting him,
and was he gracious to you?

  Soc. Yes, I thought that he was very gracious; and especially
to-day, for I have just come from him, and he has been helping me in
an argument. But shall I tell you a strange thing? I paid no attention
to him, and several times I quite forgot that he was present.

  Com. What is the meaning of this? Has anything happened between
you and him? For surely you cannot have discovered a fairer love
than he is; certainly not in this city of Athens.

  Soc. Yes, much fairer.

  Com. What do you mean-a citizen or a foreigner?

  Soc. A foreigner.

  Com. Of what country?

  Soc. Of Abdera.

  Com. And is this stranger really in your opinion a fairer love
than the son of Cleinias?

  Soc. And is not the wiser always the fairer, sweet friend?

  Com. But have you really met, Socrates, with some wise one?

  Soc. Say rather, with the wisest of all living men, if you are
willing to accord that title to Protagoras.

  Com. What! Is Protagoras in Athens?

  Soc. Yes; he has been here two days.

  Com. And do you just come from an interview with him?

  Soc. Yes; and I have heard and said many things.

  Com. Then, if you have no engagement, suppose that you sit down tell
me what passed, and my attendant here shall give up his place to you.

  Soc. To be sure; and I shall be grateful to you for listening.

  Com. Thank you, too, for telling us.

  Soc. That is thank you twice over. Listen then:-

  Last night, or rather very early this morning, Hippocrates, the
son of Apollodorus and the brother of Phason, gave a tremendous
thump with his staff at my door; some one opened to him, and he came
rushing in and bawled out: Socrates, are you awake or asleep?

  I knew his voice, and said: Hippocrates, is that you? and do you
bring any news?

  Good news, he said; nothing but good.

  Delightful, I said; but what is the news? and why have you come
hither at this unearthly hour?

  He drew nearer to me and said: Protagoras is come.

  Yes, I replied; he came two days ago: have you only just heard of
his arrival?

  Yes, by the gods, he said; but not until yesterday evening.

  At the same time he felt for the truckle-bed, and sat down at my
feet, and then he said: Yesterday quite late in the evening, on my
return from Oenoe whither I had gone in pursuit of my runaway slave
Satyrus, as I meant to have told you, if some other matter had not
come in the way;-on my return, when we had done supper and were
about to retire to rest, my brother said to me: Protagoras is come.
I was going to you at once, and then I thought that the night was
far spent. But the moment sleep left me after my fatigue, I got up and
came hither direct.

  I, who knew the very courageous madness of the man, said: What is
the matter? Has Protagoras robbed you of anything?

  He replied, laughing: Yes, indeed he has, Socrates, of the wisdom
which he keeps from me.

  But, surely, I said, if you give him money, and make friends with
him, he will make you as wise as he is himself.

  Would to heaven, he replied, that this were the case! He might
take all that I have, and all that my friends have, if he pleased. But
that is why I have come to you now, in order that you may speak to him
on my behalf; for I am young, and also I have never seen nor heard
him; (when he visited Athens before I was but a child) and all men
praise him, Socrates; he is reputed to be the most accomplished of
speakers. There is no reason why we should not go to him at once,
and then we shall find him at home. He lodges, as I hear, with Callias
the son of Hipponicus: let us start.

  I replied: Not yet, my good friend; the hour is too early. But let
us rise and take a turn in the court and wait about there until
daybreak; when the day breaks, then we will go. For Protagoras is
generally at home, and we shall be sure to find him; never fear.

  Upon this we got up and walked about in the court, and I thought
that I would make trial of the strength of his resolution. So I
examined him and put questions to him. Tell me, Hippocrates, I said,
as you are going to Protagoras, and will be paying your money to
him, what is he to whom you are going? and what will he make of you?
If, for example, you had thought of going to Hippocrates of Cos, the
Asclepiad, and were about to give him your money, and some one had
said to you: You are paying money to your namesake Hippocrates, O
Hippocrates; tell me, what is he that you give him money? how would
you have answered?

  I should say, he replied, that I gave money to him as a physician.

  And what will he make of you?

  A physician, he said.

  And if you were resolved to go to Polycleitus the Argive, or
Pheidias the Athenian, and were intending to give them money, and some
one had asked you: What are Polycleitus and Pheidias? and why do you
give them this money?-how would you have answered?

  I should have answered, that they were statuaries.

  And what will they make of you?

  A statuary, of course.

  Well now, I said, you and I are going to Protagoras, and we are
ready to pay him money on your behalf. If our own means are
sufficient, and we can gain him with these, we shall be only too glad;
but if not, then we are to spend the money of your friends as well.
Now suppose, that while we are thus enthusiastically pursuing our
object some one were to say to us: Tell me, Socrates, and you
Hippocrates, what is Protagoras, and why are you going to pay him
money,-how should we answer? I know that Pheidias is a sculptor, and
that Homer is a poet; but what appellation is given to Protagoras? how
is he designated?

  They call him a Sophist, Socrates, he replied.

  Then we are going to pay our money to him in the character of a
Sophist?

  Certainly.

  But suppose a person were to ask this further question: And how
about yourself? What will Protagoras make of you, if you go to see
him?

  He answered, with a blush upon his face (for the day was just
beginning to dawn, so that I could see him): Unless this differs in
some way from the former instances, I suppose that he will make a
Sophist of me.

  By the gods, I said, and are you not ashamed at having to appear
before the Hellenes in the character of a Sophist?

  Indeed, Socrates, to confess the truth, I am.

  But you should not assume, Hippocrates, that the instruction of
Protagoras is of this nature: may you not learn of him in the same way
that you learned the arts of the grammarian, musician, or trainer, not
with the view of making any of them a profession, but only as a part
of education, and because a private gentleman and freeman ought to
know them?

  Just so, he said; and that, in my opinion, is a far truer account of
the teaching of Protagoras.

  I said: I wonder whether you know what you are doing?

  And what am I doing?

  You are going to commit your soul to the care of a man whom you call
a Sophist. And yet I hardly think that you know what a Sophist is; and
if not, then you do not even know to whom you are committing your soul
and whether the thing to which you commit yourself be good or evil.

  I certainly think that I do know, he replied.

  Then tell me, what do you imagine that he is?

  I take him to be one who knows wise things, he replied, as his
name implies.

  And might you not, I said, affirm this of the painter and of the
carpenter also: Do not they, too, know wise things? But suppose a
person were to ask us: In what are the painters wise? We should
answer: In what relates to the making of likenesses, and similarly
of other things. And if he were further to ask: What is the wisdom
of the Sophist, and what is the manufacture over which he
presides?-how should we answer him?

  How should we answer him, Socrates? What other answer could there be
but that he presides over the art which makes men eloquent?

  Yes, I replied, that is very likely true, but not enough; for in the
answer a further question is involved: Of what does the Sophist make a
man talk eloquently? The player on the lyre may be supposed to make
a man talk eloquently about that which he makes him understand, that
is about playing the lyre. Is not that true?

  Yes.

  Then about what does the Sophist make him eloquent? Must not he make
him eloquent in that which he understands?

  Yes, that may be assumed.

  And what is that which the Sophist knows and makes his disciple
know?

  Indeed, he said, I cannot tell.

  Then I proceeded to say: Well, but are you aware of the danger which
you are incurring? If you were going to commit your body to some
one, who might do good or harm to it, would you not carefully consider
and ask the opinion of your friends and kindred, and deliberate many
days as to whether you should give him the care of your body? But when
the soul is in question, which you hold to be of far more value than
the body, and upon the good or evil of which depends the well-being of
your all,-about this never consulted either with your father or with
your brother or with any one of us who are your companions. But no
sooner does this foreigner appear, than you instantly commit your soul
to his keeping. In the evening, as you say, you hear of him, and in
the morning you go to him, never deliberating or taking the opinion of
any one as to whether you ought to intrust yourself to him or not;-you
have quite made up your mind that you will at all hazards be a pupil
of Protagoras, and are prepared to expend all the property of yourself
and of your friends in carrying out at any price this determination,
although, as you admit, you do not know him, and have never spoken
with him: and you call him a Sophist, but are manifestly ignorant of
what a Sophist is; and yet you are going to commit yourself to his
keeping.

  When he heard me say this, he replied: No other inference, Socrates,
can be drawn from your words.

  I proceeded: Is not a Sophist, Hippocrates, one who deals
wholesale or retail in the food of the soul? To me that appears to
be his nature.

  And what, Socrates, is the food of the soul?

  Surely, I said, knowledge is the food of the soul; and we must
take care, my friend, that the Sophist does not deceive us when he
praises what he sells, like the dealers wholesale or retail who sell
the food of the body; for they praise indiscriminately all their
goods, without knowing what are really beneficial or hurtful:
neither do their customers know, with the exception of any trainer
or physician who may happen to buy of them. In like manner those who
carry about the wares of knowledge, and make the round of the
cities, and sell or retail them to any customer who is in want of
them, praise them all alike; though I should not wonder, O my
friend, if many of them were really ignorant of their effect upon
the soul; and their customers equally ignorant, unless he who buys
of them happens to be a physician of the soul. If, therefore, you have
understanding of what is good and evil, you may safely buy knowledge
of Protagoras or of any one; but if not, then, O my friend, pause, and
do not hazard your dearest interests at a game of chance. For there is
far greater peril in buying knowledge than in buying meat and drink:
the one you purchase of the wholesale or retail dealer, and carry them
away in other vessels, and before you receive them into the body as
food, you may deposit them at home and call in any experienced
friend who knows what is good to be eaten or drunken, and what not,
and how much, and when; and then the danger of purchasing them is
not so great. But you cannot buy the wares of knowledge and carry them
away in another vessel; when you have paid for them you must receive
them into the soul and go your way, either greatly harmed or greatly
benefited; and therefore we should deliberate and take counsel with
our elders; for we are still young-too young to determine such a
matter. And now let us go, as we were intending, and hear
Protagoras; and when we have heard what he has to say, we may take
counsel of others; for not only is Protagoras at the house of Callias,
but there is Hippias of Elis, and, if I am not mistaken, Prodicus of
Ceos, and several other wise men.

  To this we agreed, and proceeded on our way until we reached the
vestibule of the house; and there we stopped in order to conclude a
discussion which had arisen between us as we were going along; and
we stood talking in the vestibule until we had finished and come to an
understanding. And I think that the doorkeeper, who was a eunuch,
and who was probably annoyed at the great inroad of the Sophists, must
have heard us talking. At any rate, when we knocked at the door, and
he opened and saw us, he grumbled: They are Sophists -he is not at
home; and instantly gave the door a hearty bang with both his hands.
Again we knocked, and he answered without opening: Did you not hear me
say that he is not at home, fellows? But, my friend, I said, you
need not be alarmed; for we are not Sophists, and we are not come to
see Callias, but we want to see Protagoras; and I must request you
to announce us. At last, after a good deal of difficulty, the man
was persuaded to open the door.

  When we entered, we found Protagoras taking a walk in the
cloister; and next to him, on one side, were walking Callias, the
son of Hipponicus, and Paralus, the son of Pericles, who, by the
mother's side, is his half-brother, and Charmides, the son of Glaucon.
On the other side of him were Xanthippus, the other son of Pericles,
Philippides, the son of Philomelus; also Antimoerus of Mende, who of
all the disciples of Protagoras is the most famous, and intends to
make sophistry his profession. A train of listeners followed him;
the greater part of them appeared to be foreigners, whom Protagoras
had brought with him out of the various cities visited by him in his
journeys, he, like Orpheus, attracting them his voice, and they
following. I should mention also that there were some Athenians in the
company. Nothing delighted me more than the precision of their
movements: they never got into his way at all; but when he and those
who were with him turned back, then the band of listeners parted
regularly on either side; he was always in front, and they wheeled
round and took their places behind him in perfect order.

  After him, as Homer says, "I lifted up my eyes and saw" Hippias
the Elean sitting in the opposite cloister on a chair of state, and
around him were seated on benches Eryximachus, the son of Acumenus,
and Phaedrus the Myrrhinusian, and Andron the son of Androtion, and
there were strangers whom he had brought with him from his native city
of Elis, and some others: they were putting to Hippias certain
physical and astronomical questions, and he, ex cathedra, was
determining their several questions to them, and discoursing of them.

  Also, "my eyes beheld Tantalus"; for Prodicus the Cean was at
Athens: he had been lodged in a room which, in the days of Hipponicus,
was a storehouse; but, as the house was full, Callias had cleared this
out and made the room into a guest-chamber. Now Prodicus was still
in bed, wrapped up in sheepskins and bed-clothes, of which there
seemed to be a great heap; and there was sitting by him on the couches
near, Pausanias of the deme of Cerameis, and with Pausanias was a
youth quite young, who is certainly remarkable for his good looks,
and, if I am not mistaken, is also of a fair and gentle nature. I
thought that I heard him called Agathon, and my suspicion is that he
is the beloved of Pausanias. There was this youth, and also there were
the two Adeimantuses, one the son of Cepis, and the other of
Leucolophides, and some others. I was very anxious to hear what
Prodicus was saying, for he seems to me to be an all-wise and inspired
man; but I was not able to get into the inner circle, and his fine
deep voice made an echo in the room which rendered his words
inaudible.

  No sooner had we entered than there followed us Alcibiades the
beautiful, as you say, and I believe you; and also Critias the son
of Callaeschrus.

  On entering we stopped a little, in order to look about us, and then
walked up to Protagoras, and I said: Protagoras, my friend Hippocrates
and I have come to see you.

  Do you wish, he said, to speak with me alone, or in the presence
of the company?

  Whichever you please, I said; you shall determine when you have
heard the purpose of our visit.

  And what is your purpose? he said.

  I must explain, I said, that my friend Hippocrates is a native
Athenian; he is the son of Apollodorus, and of a great and
prosperous house, and he is himself in natural ability quite a match
for anybody of his own age. I believe that he aspires to political
eminence; and this he thinks that conversation with you is most likely
to procure for him. And now you can determine whether you would wish
to speak to him of your teaching alone or in the presence of the
company.

  Thank you, Socrates, for your consideration of me. For certainly a
stranger finding his way into great cities, and persuading the
flower of the youth in them to leave company of their kinsmen or any
other acquaintances, old or young, and live with him, under the idea
that they will be improved by his conversation, ought to be very
cautious; great jealousies are aroused by his proceedings, and he is
the subject of many enmities and conspiracies. Now the art of the
Sophist is, as I believe, of great antiquity; but in ancient times
those who practised it, fearing this odium, veiled and disguised
themselves under various names, some under that of poets, as Homer,
Hesiod, and Simonides, some, of hierophants and prophets, as Orpheus
and Musaeus, and some, as I observe, even under the name of
gymnastic-masters, like Iccus of Tarentum, or the more recently
celebrated Herodicus, now of Selymbria and formerly of Megara, who
is a first-rate Sophist. Your own Agathocles pretended to be a
musician, but was really an eminent Sophist; also Pythocleides the
Cean; and there were many others; and all of them, as I was saying,
adopted these arts as veils or disguises because they were afraid of
the odium which they would incur. But that is not my way, for I do not
believe that they effected their purpose, which was to deceive the
government, who were not blinded by them; and as to the people, they
have no understanding, and only repeat what their rulers are pleased
to tell them. Now to run away, and to be caught in running away, is
the very height of folly, and also greatly increases the
exasperation of mankind; for they regard him who runs away as a rogue,
in addition to any other objections which they have to him; and
therefore I take an entirely opposite course, and acknowledge myself
to be a Sophist and instructor of mankind; such an open
acknowledgement appears to me to be a better sort of caution than
concealment. Nor do I neglect other precautions, and therefore I hope,
as I may say, by the favour of heaven that no harm will come of the
acknowledgment that I am a Sophist. And I have been now many years
in the profession-for all my years when added up are many: there is no
one here present of whom I might not be the father. Wherefore I should
much prefer conversing with you, if you want to speak with me, in
the presence of the company.

  As I suspected that he would like to have a little display and
glorification in the presence of Prodicus and Hippias, and would
gladly show us to them in the light of his admirers, I said: But why
should we not summon Prodicus and Hippias and their friends to hear
us?

  Very good, he said.

  Suppose, said Callias, that we hold a council in which you may sit
and discuss.-This was agreed upon, and great delight was felt at the
prospect of hearing wise men talk; we ourselves took the chairs and
benches, and arranged them by Hippias, where the other benches had
been already placed. Meanwhile Callias and Alcibiades got Prodicus out
of bed and brought in him and his companions.

  When we were all seated, Protagoras said: Now that the company are
assembled, Socrates, tell me about the youngman of whom you were
just now speaking.

  I replied: I will begin again at the same point, Protagoras, and
tell you once more the purport of my visit: this is my friend
Hippocrates, who is desirous of making your acquaintance; he would
like to know what will happen to him if he associates with you. I have
no more to say.

  Protagoras answered: Young man, if you associate with me, on the
very first day you will return home a better man than you came, and
better on the second day than on the first, and better every day
than you were on the day before.

  When I heard this, I said: Protagoras, I do not at all wonder at
hearing you say this; even at your age, and with all your wisdom, if
any one were to teach you what you did not know before, you would
become better no doubt: but please to answer in a different way-I will
explain how by an example. Let me suppose that Hippocrates, instead of
desiring your acquaintance, wished to become acquainted with the young
man Zeuxippus of Heraclea, who has lately been in Athens, and he had
come to him as he has come to you, and had heard him say, as he has
heard you say, that every day he would grow and become better if he
associated with him: and then suppose that he were to ask him, "In
what shall I become better, and in what shall I grow?"-Zeuxippus would
answer, "In painting." And suppose that he went to Orthagoras the
Theban, and heard him say the same thing, and asked him, "In what
shall I become better day by day?" he would reply, "In flute-playing."
Now I want you to make the same sort of answer to this young man and
to me, who am asking questions on his account. When you say that on
the first day on which he associates with you he will return home a
better man, and on every day will grow in like manner,-In what,
Protagoras, will he be better? and about what?

  When Protagoras heard me say this, he replied: You ask questions
fairly, and I like to answer a question which is fairly put. If
Hippocrates comes to me he will not experience the sort of drudgery
with which other Sophists are in the habit of insulting their
pupils; who, when they have just escaped from the arts, are taken
and driven back into them by these teachers, and made to learn
calculation, and astronomy, and geometry, and music (he gave a look at
Hippias as he said this); but if he comes to me, he will learn that
which he comes to learn. And this is prudence in affairs private as
well as public; he will learn to order his own house in the best
manner, and he will be able to speak and act for the best in the
affairs of the state.

  Do I understand you, I said; and is your meaning that you teach
the art of politics, and that you promise to make men good citizens?

  That, Socrates, is exactly the profession which I make.

  Then, I said, you do indeed possess a noble art, if there is no
mistake about this; for I will freely confess to you, Protagoras, that
I have a doubt whether this art is capable of being taught, and yet
I know not how to disbelieve your assertion. And I ought to tell you
why I am of opinion that this art cannot be taught or communicated
by man to man. I say that the Athenians are an understanding people,
and indeed they are esteemed to be such by the other Hellenes. Now I
observe that when we are met together in the assembly, and the
matter in hand relates to building, the builders are summoned as
advisers; when the question is one of shipbuilding, then the
ship-wrights; and the like of other arts which they think capable of
being taught and learned. And if some person offers to give them
advice who is not supposed by them to have any skill in the art,
even though he be good-looking, and rich, and noble, they will not
listen to him, but laugh and hoot at him, until either he is clamoured
down and retires of himself; or if he persist, he is dragged away or
put out by the constables at the command of the prytanes. This is
their way of behaving about professors of the arts. But when the
question is an affair of state, then everybody is free to have a
say-carpenter, tinker, cobbler, sailor, passenger; rich and poor, high
and low-any one who likes gets up, and no one reproaches him, as in
the former case, with not having learned, and having no teacher, and
yet giving advice; evidently because they are under the impression
that this sort of knowledge cannot be taught. And not only is this
true of the state, but of individuals; the best and wisest of our
citizens are unable to impart their political wisdom to others: as for
example, Pericles, the father of these young men, who gave them
excellent instruction in all that could be learned from masters, in
his own department of politics neither taught them, nor gave them
teachers; but they were allowed to wander at their own free will in
a sort of hope that they would light upon virtue of their own
accord. Or take another example: there was Cleinias the younger
brother of our friend Alcibiades, of whom this very same Pericles
was the guardian; and he being in fact under the apprehension that
Cleinias would be corrupted by Alcibiades, took him away, and placed
him in the house of Ariphron to be educated; but before six months had
elapsed, Ariphron sent him back, not knowing what to do with him.
And I could mention numberless other instances of persons who were
good themselves, and never yet made any one else good, whether
friend or stranger. Now I, Protagoras, having these examples before
me, am inclined to think that virtue cannot be taught. But then again,
when I listen to your words, I waver; and am disposed to think that
there must be something in what you say, because I know that you
have great experience, and learning, and invention. And I wish that
you would, if possible, show me a little more clearly that virtue
can be taught. Will you be so good?

  That I will, Socrates, and gladly. But what would you like? Shall I,
as an elder, speak to you as younger men in an apologue or myth, or
shall I argue out the question?

  To this several of the company answered that he should choose for
himself.

  Well, then, he said, I think that the myth will be more interesting.

  Once upon a time there were gods only, and no mortal creatures.
But when the time came that these also should be created, the gods
fashioned them out of earth and fire and various mixtures of both
elements in the interior of the earth; and when they were about to
bring them into the light of day, they ordered Prometheus and
Epimetheus to equip them, and to distribute to them severally their
proper qualities. Epimetheus said to Prometheus: "Let me distribute,
and do you inspect." This was agreed, and Epimetheus made the
distribution. There were some to whom he gave strength without
swiftness, while he equipped the weaker with swiftness; some he armed,
and others he left unarmed; and devised for the latter some other
means of preservation, making some large, and having their size as a
protection, and others small, whose nature was to fly in the air or
burrow in the ground; this was to be their way of escape. Thus did
he compensate them with the view of preventing any race from
becoming extinct. And when he had provided against their destruction
by one another, he contrived also a means of protecting them against
the seasons of heaven; clothing them with close hair and thick skins
sufficient to defend them against the winter cold and able to resist
the summer heat, so that they might have a natural bed of their own
when they wanted to rest; also he furnished them with hoofs and hair
and hard and callous skins under their feet. Then he gave them
varieties of food-herb of the soil to some, to others fruits of trees,
and to others roots, and to some again he gave other animals as
food. And some he made to have few young ones, while those who were
their prey were very prolific; and in this manner the race was
preserved. Thus did Epimetheus, who, not being very wise, forgot
that he had distributed among the brute animals all the qualities
which he had to give-and when he came to man, who was still
unprovided, he was terribly perplexed. Now while he was in this
perplexity, Prometheus came to inspect the distribution, and he
found that the other animals were suitably furnished, but that man
alone was naked and shoeless, and had neither bed nor arms of defence.
The appointed hour was approaching when man in his turn was to go
forth into the light of day; and Prometheus, not knowing how he
could devise his salvation, stole the mechanical arts of Hephaestus
and Athene, and fire with them (they could neither have been
acquired nor used without fire), and gave them to man. Thus man had
the wisdom necessary to the support of life, but political wisdom he
had not; for that was in the keeping of Zeus, and the power of
Prometheus did not extend to entering into the citadel of heaven,
where Zeus dwelt, who moreover had terrible sentinels; but he did
enter by stealth into the common workshop of Athene and Hephaestus, in
which they used to practise their favourite arts, and carried off
Hephaestus' art of working by fire, and also the art of Athene, and
gave them to man. And in this way man was supplied with the means of
life. But Prometheus is said to have been afterwards prosecuted for
theft, owing to the blunder of Epimetheus.

  Now man, having a share of the divine attributes, was at first the
only one of the animals who had any gods, because he alone was of
their kindred; and he would raise altars and images of them. He was
not long in inventing articulate speech and names; and he also
constructed houses and clothes and shoes and beds, and drew sustenance
from the earth. Thus provided, mankind at first lived dispersed, and
there were no cities. But the consequence was that they were destroyed
by the wild beasts, for they were utterly weak in comparison of
them, and their art was only sufficient to provide them with the means
of life, and did not enable them to carry on war against the
animals: food they had, but not as yet the art of government, of which
the art of war is a part. After a while the desire of
self-preservation gathered them into cities; but when they were
gathered together, having no art of government, they evil intreated
one another, and were again in process of dispersion and
destruction. Zeus feared that the entire race would be exterminated,
and so he sent Hermes to them, bearing reverence and justice to be the
ordering principles of cities and the bonds of friendship and
conciliation. Hermes asked Zeus how he should impart justice and
reverence among men:-Should he distribute them as the arts are
distributed; that is to say, to a favoured few only, one skilled
individual having enough of medicine or of any other art for many
unskilled ones? "Shall this be the manner in which I am to
distribute justice and reverence among men, or shall I give them to
all?" "To all," said Zeus; "I should like them all to have a share;
for cities cannot exist, if a few only share in the virtues, as in the
arts. And further, make a law by my order, that he who has no part
in reverence and justice shall be put to death, for he is a plague
of the state."

  And this is the reason, Socrates, why the Athenians and mankind in
general, when the question relates to carpentering or any other
mechanical art, allow but a few to share in their deliberations; and
when any one else interferes, then, as you say, they object, if he
be not of the favoured few; which, as I reply, is very natural. But
when they meet to deliberate about political virtue, which proceeds
only by way of justice and wisdom, they are patient enough of any
man who speaks of them, as is also natural, because they think that
every man ought to share in this sort of virtue, and that states could
not exist if this were otherwise. I have explained to you, Socrates,
the reason of this phenomenon.

  And that you may not suppose yourself to be deceived in thinking
that all men regard every man as having a share of justice or
honesty and of every other political virtue, let me give you a further
proof, which is this. In other cases, as you are aware, if a man
says that he is a good flute-player, or skilful in any other art in
which he has no skill, people either laugh at him or are angry with
him, and his relations think that he is mad and go and admonish him;
but when honesty is in question, or some other political virtue,
even if they know that he is dishonest, yet, if the man comes publicly
forward and tells the truth about his dishonesty, then, what in the
other case was held by them to be good sense, they now deem to be
madness. They say that all men ought to profess honesty whether they
are honest or not, and that a man is out of his mind who says anything
else. Their notion is, that a man must have some degree of honesty;
and that if he has none at all he ought not to be in the world.

  I have been showing that they are right in admitting every man as
a counsellor about this sort of virtue, as they are of opinion that
every man is a partaker of it. And I will now endeavour to show
further that they do not conceive this virtue to be given by nature,
or to grow spontaneously, but to be a thing which may be taught; and
which comes to a man by taking pains. No one would instruct, no one
would rebuke, or be angry with those whose calamities they suppose
to be due to nature or chance; they do not try to punish or to prevent
them from being what they are; they do but pity them. Who is so
foolish as to chastise or instruct the ugly, or the diminutive, or the
feeble? And for this reason. Because he knows that good and evil of
this kind is the work of nature and of chance; whereas if a man is
wanting in those good qualities which are attained by study and
exercise and teaching, and has only the contrary evil qualities, other
men are angry with him, and punish and reprove him-of these evil
qualities one is impiety, another injustice, and they may be described
generally as the very opposite of political virtue. In such cases
any man will be angry with another, and reprimand him,-clearly because
he thinks that by study and learning, the virtue in which the other is
deficient may be acquired. If you will think, Socrates, of the
nature of punishment, you will see at once that in the opinion of
mankind virtue may be acquired; no one punishes the evil-doer under
the notion, or for the reason, that he has done wrong, only the
unreasonable fury of a beast acts in that manner. But he who desires
to inflict rational punishment does not retaliate for a past wrong
which cannot be undone; he has regard to the future, and is desirous
that the man who is punished, and he who sees him punished, may be
deterred from doing wrong again. He punishes for the sake of
prevention, thereby clearly implying that virtue is capable of being
taught. This is the notion of all who retaliate upon others either
privately or publicly. And the Athenians, too, your own citizens, like
other men, punish and take vengeance on all whom they regard as evil
doers; and hence, we may infer them to be of the number of those who
think that virtue may be acquired and taught. Thus far, Socrates, I
have shown you clearly enough, if I am not mistaken, that your
countrymen are right in admitting the tinker and the cobbler to advise
about politics, and also that they deem virtue to be capable of
being taught and acquired.

  There yet remains one difficulty which has been raised by you
about the sons of good men. What is the reason why good men teach
their sons the knowledge which is gained from teachers, and make
them wise in that, but do nothing towards improving them in the
virtues which distinguish themselves? And here, Socrates, I will leave
the apologue and resume the argument. Please to consider: Is there
or is there not some one quality of which all the citizens must be
partakers, if there is to be a city at all? In the answer to this
question is contained the only solution of your difficulty; there is
no other. For if there be any such quality, and this quality or
unity is not the art of the carpenter, or the smith, or the potter,
but justice and temperance and holiness and, in a word, manly
virtue-if this is the quality of which all men must be partakers,
and which is the very condition of their learning or doing anything
else, and if he who is wanting in this, whether he be a child only
or a grown-up man or woman, must be taught and punished, until by
punishment he becomes better, and he who rebels against instruction
and punishment is either exiled or condemned to death under the idea
that he is incurable-if what I am saying be true, good men have
their sons taught other things and not this, do consider how
extraordinary their conduct would appear to be. For we have shown that
they think virtue capable of being taught and cultivated both in
private and public; and, notwithstanding, they have their sons
taught lesser matters, ignorance of which does not involve the
punishment of death: but greater things, of which the ignorance may
cause death and exile to those who have no training or knowledge of
them-aye, and confiscation as well as death, and, in a word, may be
the ruin of families-those things, I say, they are supposed not to
teach them-not to take the utmost care that they should learn. How
improbable is this, Socrates!

  Education and admonition commence in the first years of childhood,
and last to the very end of life. Mother and nurse and father and
tutor are vying with one another about the improvement of the child as
soon as ever he is able to understand what is being said to him: he
cannot say or do anything without their setting forth to him that this
is just and that is unjust; this is honourable, that is dishonourable;
this is holy, that is unholy; do this and abstain from that. And if he
obeys, well and good; if not, he is straightened by threats and blows,
like a piece of bent or warped wood. At a later stage they send him to
teachers, and enjoin them to see to his manners even more than to
his reading and music; and the teachers do as they are desired. And
when the boy has learned his letters and is beginning to understand
what is written, as before he understood only what was spoken, they
put into his hands the works of great poets, which he reads sitting on
a bench at school; in these are contained many admonitions, and many
tales, and praises, and encomia of ancient famous men, which he is
required to learn by heart, in order that he may imitate or emulate
them and desire to become like them. Then, again, the teachers of
the lyre take similar care that their young disciple is temperate
and gets into no mischief; and when they have taught him the use of
the lyre, they introduce him to the poems of other excellent poets,
who are the lyric poets; and these they set to music, and make their
harmonies ana rhythms quite familiar to the children's souls, in order
that they may learn to be more gentle, and harmonious, and rhythmical,
and so more fitted for speech and action; for the life of man in every
part has need of harmony and rhythm. Then they send them to the master
of gymnastic, in order that their bodies may better minister to the
virtuous mind, and that they may not be compelled through bodily
weakness to play the coward in war or on any other occasion. This is
what is done by those who have the means, and those who have the means
are the rich; their children begin to go to school soonest and leave
off latest. When they have done with masters, the state again
compels them to learn the laws, and live after the pattern which
they furnish, and not after their own fancies; and just as in learning
to write, the writing-master first draws lines with a style for the
use of the young beginner, and gives him the tablet and makes him
follow the lines, so the city draws the laws, which were the invention
of good lawgivers living in the olden time; these are given to the
young man, in order to guide him in his conduct whether he is
commanding or obeying; and he who transgresses them is to be
corrected, or, in other words, called to account, which is a term used
not only in your country, but also in many others, seeing that justice
calls men to account. Now when there is all this care about virtue
private and public, why, Socrates, do you still wonder and doubt
whether virtue can be taught? Cease to wonder, for the opposite
would be far more surprising.

  But why then do the sons of good fathers often turn out ill? There
is nothing very wonderful in this; for, as I have been saying, the
existence of a state implies that virtue is not any man's private
possession. If so-and nothing can be truer-then I will further ask you
to imagine, as an illustration, some other pursuit or branch of
knowledge which may be assumed equally to be the condition of the
existence of a state. Suppose that there could be no state unless we
were all flute-players, as far as each had the capacity, and everybody
was freely teaching everybody the art, both in private and public, and
reproving the bad player as freely and openly as every man now teaches
justice and the laws, not concealing them as he would conceal the
other arts, but imparting them-for all of us have a mutual interest in
the justice and virtue of one another, and this is the reason why
every one is so ready to teach justice and the laws;-suppose, I say,
that there were the same readiness and liberality among us in teaching
one another flute-playing, do you imagine, Socrates, that the sons
of good flute players would be more likely to be good than the sons of
bad ones? I think not. Would not their sons grow up to be
distinguished or undistinguished according to their own natural
capacities as flute-players, and the son of a good player would
often turn out to be a bad one, and the son of a bad player to be a
good one, all flute-players would be good enough in comparison of
those who were ignorant and unacquainted with the art of
flute-playing? In like manner I would have you consider that he who
appears to you to be the worst of those who have been brought up in
laws and humanities, would appear to be a just man and a master of
justice if he were to be compared with men who had no education, or
courts of justice, or laws, or any restraints upon them which
compelled them to practise virtue-with the savages, for example,
whom the poet Pherecrates exhibited on the stage at the last year's
Lenaean festival. If you were living among men such as the
man-haters in his Chorus, you would be only too glad to meet with
Eurybates and Phrynondas, and you would sorrowfully long to revisit
the rascality of this part of the world. you, Socrates, are
discontented, and why? Because all men are teachers of virtue, each
one according to his ability; and you say, Where are the teachers? You
might as well ask, Who teaches Greek? For of that too there will not
be any teachers found. Or you might ask, Who is to teach the sons of
our artisans this same art which they have learned of their fathers?
He and his fellow-workmen have taught them to the best of their
ability,-but who will carry them further in their arts? And you
would certainly have a difficulty, Socrates, in finding a teacher of
them; but there would be no difficulty in finding a teacher of those
who are wholly ignorant. And this is true of virtue or of anything
else; if a man is better able than we are to promote virtue ever so
little, we must be content with the result. A teacher of this sort I
believe myself to be, and above all other men to have the knowledge
which makes a man noble and good; and I give my pupils their
money's-worth, and even more, as they themselves confess. And
therefore I have introduced the following mode of payment:-When a
man has been my pupil, if he likes he pays my price, but there is no
compulsion; and if he does not like, he has only to go into a temple
and take an oath of the value of the instructions, and he pays no more
than he declares to be their value.

  Such is my Apologue, Socrates, and such is the argument by which I
endeavour to show that virtue may be taught, and that this is the
opinion of the Athenians. And I have also attempted to show that you
are not to wonder at good fathers having bad sons, or at good sons
having bad fathers, of which the sons of Polycleitus afford an
example, who are the companions of our friends here, Paralus and
Xanthippus, but are nothing in comparison with their father; and
this is true of the sons of many other artists. As yet I ought not
to say the same of Paralus and Xanthippus themselves, for they are
young and there is still hope of them.

  Protagoras ended, and in my ear

    So charming left his voice, that I the while

    Thought him still speaking; still stood fixed to hear.

At length, when the truth dawned upon me, that he had really finished,
not without difficulty I began to collect myself, and looking at
Hippocrates, I said to him: O son of Apollodorus, how deeply
grateful I am to you for having brought me hither; I would not have
missed the speech of Protagoras for a great deal. For I used to
imagine that no human care could make men good; but I know better now.
Yet I have still one very small difficulty which I am sure that
Protagoras will easily explain, as he has already explained so much.
If a man were to go and consult Pericles or any of our great
speakers about these matters, he might perhaps hear as fine a
discourse; but then when one has a question to ask of any of them,
like books, they can neither answer nor ask; and if any one challenges
the least particular of their speech, they go ringing on in a long
harangue, like brazen pots, which when they are struck continue to
sound unless some one puts his hand upon them; whereas our friend
Protagoras can not only make a good speech, as he has already shown,
but when he is asked a question he can answer briefly; and when he
asks he will wait and hear the answer; and this is a very rare gift.
Now I, Protagoras, want to ask of you a little question, which if
you will only answer, I shall be quite satisfied. You were saying that
virtue can be taught;-that I will take upon your authority, and
there is no one to whom I am more ready to trust. But I marvel at
one thing about which I should like to have my mind set at rest. You
were speaking of Zeus sending justice and reverence to men; and
several times while you were speaking, justice, and temperance, and
holiness, and all these qualities, were described by you as if
together they made up virtue. Now I want you to tell me truly
whether virtue is one whole, of which justice and temperance and
holiness are parts; or whether all these are only the names of one and
the same thing: that is the doubt which still lingers in my mind.

  There is no difficulty, Socrates, in answering that the qualities of
which you are speaking are the parts of virtue which is one.

  And are they parts, I said, in the same sense in which mouth,
nose, and eyes, and ears, are the parts of a face; or are they like
the parts of gold, which differ from the whole and from one another
only in being larger or smaller?

  I should say that they differed, Socrates, in the first way; they
are related to one another as the parts of a face are related to the
whole face.

  And do men have some one part and some another part of virtue? Of if
a man has one part, must he also have all the others?

  By no means, he said; for many a man is brave and not just, or
just and not wise.

  You would not deny, then, that courage and wisdom are also parts
of virtue?

  Most undoubtedly they are, he answered; and wisdom is the noblest of
the parts.

  And they are all different from one another? I said.

  Yes.

  And has each of them a distinct function like the parts of the
face;-the eye, for example, is not like the ear, and has not the
same functions; and the other parts are none of them like one another,
either in their functions, or in any other way? I want to know whether
the comparison holds concerning the parts of virtue. Do they also
differ from one another in themselves and in their functions? For that
is clearly what the simile would imply.

  Yes, Socrates, you are right in supposing that they differ.

  Then, I said, no other part of virtue is like knowledge, or like
justice, or like courage, or like temperance, or like holiness?

  No, he answered.

  Well then, I said, suppose that you and I enquire into their
natures. And first, you would agree with me that justice is of the
nature of a thing, would you not? That is my opinion: would it not
be yours also?

  Mine also, he said.

  And suppose that some one were to ask us, saying, "O Protagoras, and
you, Socrates, what about this thing which you were calling justice,
is it just or unjust?"-and I were to answer, just: would you vote with
me or against me?

  With you, he said.

  Thereupon I should answer to him who asked me, that justice is of
the nature of the just: would not you?

  Yes, he said.

  And suppose that he went on to say: "Well now, is there also such
a thing as holiness? "we should answer, "Yes," if I am not mistaken?

  Yes, he said.

  Which you would also acknowledge to be a thing-should we not say so?

  He assented.

  "And is this a sort of thing which is of the nature of the holy,
or of the nature of the unholy?" I should be angry at his putting such
a question, and should say, "Peace, man; nothing can be holy if
holiness is not holy." What would you say? Would you not answer in the
same way?

  Certainly, he said.

  And then after this suppose that he came and asked us, "What were
you saying just now? Perhaps I may not have heard you rightly, but you
seemed to me to be saying that the parts of virtue were not the same
as one another." I should reply, "You certainly heard that said, but
not, as you imagine, by me; for I only asked the question;
Protagoras gave the answer." And suppose that he turned to you and
said, "Is this true, Protagoras? and do you maintain that one part
of virtue is unlike another, and is this your position?"-how would you
answer him?

  I could not help acknowledging the truth of what he said, Socrates.

  Well then, Protagoras, we will assume this; and now supposing that
he proceeded to say further, "Then holiness is not of the nature of
justice, nor justice of the nature of holiness, but of the nature of
unholiness; and holiness is of the nature of the not just, and
therefore of the unjust, and the unjust is the unholy": how shall we
answer him? I should certainly answer him on my own behalf that
justice is holy, and that holiness is just; and I would say in like
manner on your behalf also, if you would allow me, that justice is
either the same with holiness, or very nearly the same; and above
all I would assert that justice is like holiness and holiness is
like justice; and I wish that you would tell me whether I may be
permitted to give this answer on your behalf, and whether you would
agree with me.

  He replied, I cannot simply agree, Socrates, to the proposition that
justice is holy and that holiness is just, for there appears to me
to be a difference between them. But what matter? if you please I
please; and let us assume, if you will I, that justice is holy, and
that holiness is just.

  Pardon me, I replied; I do not want this "if you wish" or "if you
will" sort of conclusion to be proven, but I want you and me to be
proven: I mean to say that the conclusion will be best proven if there
be no "if."

  Well, he said, I admit that justice bears a resemblance to holiness,
for there is always some point of view in which everything is like
every other thing; white is in a certain way like black, and hard is
like soft, and the most extreme opposites have some qualities in
common; even the parts of the face which, as we were saying before,
are distinct and have different functions, are still in a certain
point of view similar, and one of them is like another of them. And
you may prove that they are like one another on the same principle
that all things are like one another; and yet things which are like in
some particular ought not to be called alike, nor things which are
unlike in some particular, however slight, unlike.

  And do you think, I said in a tone of surprise, that justice and
holiness have but a small degree of likeness?

  Certainly not; any more than I agree with what I understand to be
your view.

  Well, I said, as you appear to have a difficulty about this, let
us take another of the examples which you mentioned instead. Do you
admit the existence of folly?

  I do.

  And is not wisdom the. very opposite of folly?

  That is true, he said.

  And when men act rightly and advantageously they seem to you to be
temperate?

  Yes, he said.

  And temperance makes them temperate?

  Certainly.

  And they who do not act rightly act foolishly, and in acting thus
are not temperate?

  I agree, he said.

  Then to act foolishly is the opposite of acting temperately?

  He assented.

  And foolish actions are done by folly, and temperate actions by
temperance?

  He agreed.

  And that is done strongly which is done by strength, and that
which is weakly done, by weakness?

  He assented.

  And that which is done with swiftness is done swiftly, and that
which is done with slowness, slowly?

  He assented again.

  And that which is done in the same manner, is done by the same;
and that which is done in an opposite manner by the opposite?

  He agreed.

  Once more, I said, is there anything beautiful?

  Yes.

  To which the only opposite is the ugly?

  There is no other.

  And is there anything good?

  There is.

  To which the only opposite is the evil?

  There is no other.

  And there is the acute in sound?

  True.

  To which the only opposite is the grave?

  There is no other, he said, but that.

  Then every opposite has one opposite only and no more?

  He assented.

  Then now, I said, let us recapitulate our admissions. First of all
we admitted that everything has one opposite and not more than one?

  We did so.

  And we admitted also that what was done in opposite ways was done by
opposites?

  Yes.

  And that which was done foolishly, as we further admitted, was
done in the opposite way to that which was done temperately?

  Yes.

  And that which was done temperately was done by temperance, and that
which was done foolishly by folly?

  He agreed.

  And that which is done in opposite ways is done by opposites?

  Yes.

  And one thing is done by temperance, and quite another thing by
folly?

  Yes.

  And in opposite ways?

  Certainly.

  And therefore by opposites:-then folly is the opposite of
temperance?

  Clearly.

  And do you remember that folly has already been acknowledged by us
to be the opposite of wisdom?

  He assented.

  And we said that everything has only one opposite?

  Yes.

  Then, Protagoras, which of the two assertions shall we renounce? One
says that everything has but one opposite; the other that wisdom is
distinct from temperance, and that both of them are parts of virtue;
and that they are not only distinct, but dissimilar, both in
themselves and in their functions, like the parts of a face. Which
of these two assertions shall we renounce? For both of them together
are certainly not in harmony; they do not accord or agree: for how can
they be said to agree if everything is assumed to have only one
opposite and not more than one, and yet folly, which is one, has
clearly the two opposites wisdom and temperance? Is not that true,
Protagoras? What else would you say?

  He assented, but with great reluctance.

  Then temperance and wisdom are the same, as before justice and
holiness appeared to us to be nearly the same. And now, Protagoras,
I said, we must finish the enquiry, and not faint. Do you think that
an unjust man can be temperate in his injustice?

  I should be ashamed, Socrates, he said, to acknowledge this which
nevertheless many may be found to assert.

  And shall I argue with them or with you? I replied.

  I would rather, he said, that you should argue with the many
first, if you will.

  Whichever you please, if you will only answer me and say whether you
are of their opinion or not. My object is to test the validity of
the argument; and yet the result may be that I who ask and you who
answer may both be put on our trial.

  Protagoras at first made a show of refusing, as he said that the
argument was not encouraging; at length, he consented to answer.

  Now then, I said, begin at the beginning and answer me. You think
that some men are temperate, and yet unjust?

  Yes, he said; let that be admitted.

  And temperance is good sense?

  Yes.

  And good sense is good counsel in doing injustice?

  Granted.

  If they succeed, I said, or if they do not succeed?

  If they succeed.

  And you would admit the existence of goods?

  Yes.

  And is the good that which is expedient for man?

  Yes, indeed, he said: and there are some things which may be
inexpedient, and yet I call them good.

  I thought that Protagoras was getting ruffled and excited; he seemed
to be setting himself in an attitude of war. Seeing this, I minded
my business, and gently said:-

  When you say, Protagoras, that things inexpedient are good, do you
mean inexpedient for man only, or inexpedient altogether? and do you
call the latter good?

  Certainly not the last, he replied; for I know of many things-meats,
drinks, medicines, and ten thousand other things, which are
inexpedient for man, and some which are expedient; and some which
are neither expedient nor inexpedient for man, but only for horses;
and some for oxen only, and some for dogs; and some for no animals,
but only for trees; and some for the roots of trees and not for
their branches, as for example, manure, which is a good thing when
laid about the roots of a tree, but utterly destructive if thrown upon
the shoots and young branches; or I may instance olive oil, which is
mischievous to all plants, and generally most injurious to the hair of
every animal with the exception of man, but beneficial to human hair
and to the human body generally; and even in this application (so
various and changeable is the nature of the benefit), that which is
the greatest good to the outward parts of a man, is a very great
evil to his inward parts: and for this reason physicians always forbid
their patients the use of oil in their food, except in very small
quantities, just enough to extinguish the disagreeable sensation of
smell in meats and sauces.

  When he had given this answer, the company cheered him. And I
said: Protagoras, I have a wretched memory, and when any one makes a
long speech to me I never remember what he is talking about. As
then, if I had been deaf, and you were going to converse with me,
you would have had to raise your voice; so now, having such a bad
memory, I will ask you to cut your answers shorter, if you would
take me with you.

  What do you mean? he said: how am I to shorten my answers? shall I
make them too short?

  Certainly not, I said.

  But short enough?

  Yes, I said.

  Shall I answer what appears to me to be short enough, or what
appears to you to be short enough?

  I have heard, I said, that you can speak and teach others to speak
about the same things at such length that words never seemed to
fail, or with such brevity that no one could use fewer of them. Please
therefore, if you talk with me, to adopt the latter or more
compendious method.

  Socrates, he replied, many a battle of words have I fought, and if I
had followed the method of disputation which my adversaries desired,
as you want me to do, I should have been no better than another, and
the name of Protagoras would have been nowhere.

  I saw that he was not satisfied with his previous answers, and
that he would not play the part of answerer any more if he could help;
and I considered that there was no call upon me to continue the
conversation; so I said: Protagoras, I do not wish to force the
conversation upon you if you had rather not, but when you are
willing to argue with me in such a way that I can follow you, then I
will argue with you. Now you, as is said of you by others and as you
say of yourself, are able to have discussions in shorter forms of
speech as well as in longer, for you are a master of wisdom; but I
cannot manage these long speeches: I only wish that I could. You, on
the other hand, who are capable of either, ought to speak shorter as I
beg you, and then we might converse. But I see that you are
disinclined, and as I have an engagement which will prevent my staying
to hear you at greater length (for I have to be in another place), I
will depart; although I should have liked to have heard you.

  Thus I spoke, and was rising from my seat, when Callias seized me by
the right hand, and in his left hand caught hold of this old cloak
of mine. He said: We cannot let you go, Socrates, for if you leave
us there will be an end of our discussions: I must therefore beg you
to remain, as there is nothing in the world that I should like
better than to hear you and Protagoras discourse. Do not deny the
company this pleasure.

  Now I had got up, and was in the act of departure. Son of
Hipponicus, I replied, I have always admired, and do now heartily
applaud and love your philosophical spirit, and I would gladly
comply with your request, if I could. But the truth is that I
cannot. And what you ask is as great an impossibility to me, as if you
bade me run a race with Crison of Himera, when in his prime, or with
some one of the long or day course runners. To such a request I should
reply that I would fain ask the same of my own legs; but they refuse
to comply. And therefore if you want to see Crison and me in the
same stadium, you must bid him slacken his speed to mine, for I cannot
run quickly, and he can run slowly. And in like manner if you want
to hear me and Protagoras discoursing, you must ask him to shorten his
answers, and keep to the point, as he did at first; if not, how can
there be any discussion? For discussion is one thing, and making an
oration is quite another, in my humble opinion.

  But you see, Socrates, said Callias, that Protagoras may fairly
claim to speak in his own way, just as you claim to speak in yours.

  Here Alcibiades interposed, and said: That, Callias, is not a true
statement of the case. For our friend Socrates admits that he cannot
make a speech-in this he yields the palm to Protagoras: but I should
be greatly surprised if he yielded to any living man in the power of
holding and apprehending an argument. Now if Protagoras will make a
similar admission, and confess that he is inferior to Socrates in
argumentative skill, that is enough for Socrates; but if he claims a
superiority in argument as well, let him ask and answer-not, when a
question is asked, slipping away from the point, and instead of
answering, making a speech at such length that most of his hearers
forget the question at issue (not that Socrates is likely to
forget-I will be bound for that, although he may pretend in fun that
he has a bad memory). And Socrates appears to me to be more in the
right than Protagoras; that is my view, and every man ought to say
what he thinks.

  When Alcibiades had done speaking, some one-Critias, I
believe-went on to say: O Prodicus and Hippias, Callias appears to
me to be a partisan of Protagoras: and this led Alcibiades, who
loves opposition, to take the other side. But we should not be
partisans either of Socrates or of Protagoras; let us rather unite
in entreating both of them not to break up the discussion.

  Prodicus added: That, Critias, seems to me to be well said, for
those who are present at such discussions ought to be impartial
hearers of both the speakers; remembering, however, that
impartiality is not the same as equality, for both sides should be
impartially heard, and yet an equal meed should not be assigned to
both of them; but to the wiser a higher meed should be given, and a
lower to the less wise. And I as well as Critias would beg you,
Protagoras and Socrates, to grant our request, which is, that you will
argue with one another and not wrangle; for friends argue with friends
out of goodwill, but only adversaries and enemies wrangle. And then
our meeting will be delightful; for in this way you, who are the
speakers, will be most likely to win esteem, and not praise only,
among us who are your audience; for esteem is a sincere conviction
of the hearers' souls, but praise is often an insincere expression
of men uttering falsehoods contrary to their conviction. And thus we
who are the hearers will be gratified and not pleased; for
gratification is of the mind when receiving wisdom and knowledge,
but pleasure is of the body when eating or experiencing some other
bodily delight. Thus spoke Prodicus, and many of the company applauded
his words.

  Hippias the sage spoke next. He said: All of you who are here
present I reckon to be kinsmen and friends and fellow-citizens, by
nature and not by law; for by nature like is akin to like, whereas law
is the tyrant of mankind, and often compels us to do many things which
are against nature. How great would be the disgrace then, if we, who
know the nature of things, and are the wisest of the Hellenes, and
as such are met together in this city, which is the metropolis of
wisdom, and in the greatest and most glorious house of this city,
should have nothing to show worthy of this height of dignity, but
should only quarrel with one another like the meanest of mankind I
pray and advise you, Protagoras, and you, Socrates, to agree upon a
compromise. Let us be your peacemakers. And do not you, Socrates,
aim at this precise and extreme brevity in discourse, if Protagoras
objects, but loosen and let go the reins of speech, that your words
may be grander and more becoming to you. Neither do you, Protagoras,
go forth on the gale with every sail set out of sight of land into
an ocean of words, but let there be a mean observed by both of you. Do
as I say. And let me also persuade you to choose an arbiter or
overseer or president; he will keep watch over your words and will
prescribe their proper length.

  This proposal was received by the company with universal approval;
Callias said that he would not let me off, and they begged me to
choose an arbiter. But I said that to choose an umpire of discourse
would be unseemly; for if the person chosen was inferior, then the
inferior or worse ought not to preside over the better; or if he was
equal, neither would that be well; for he who is our equal will do
as we do, and what will be the use of choosing him? And if you say,
"Let us have a better then,"-to that I answer that you cannot have any
one who is wiser than Protagoras. And if you choose another who is not
really better, and whom you only say is better, to put another over
him as though he were an inferior person would be an unworthy
reflection on him; not that, as far as I am concerned, any
reflection is of much consequence to me. Let me tell you then what I
will do in order that the conversation and discussion may go on as you
desire. If Protagoras is not disposed to answer, let him ask and I
will answer; and I will endeavour to show at the same time how, as I
maintain, he ought to answer: and when I have answered as many
questions as he likes to ask, let him in like manner answer me; and if
he seems to be not very ready at answering the precise question
asked of him, you and I will unite in entreating him, as you entreated
me, not to spoil the discussion. And this will require no special
arbiter-all of you shall be arbiters.

  This was generally approved, and Protagoras, though very much
against his will, was obliged to agree that he would ask questions;
and when he had put a sufficient number of them, that he would
answer in his turn those which he was asked in short replies. He began
to put his questions as follows:-

  I am of opinion, Socrates, he said, that skill in poetry is the
principal part of education; and this I conceive to be the power of
knowing what compositions of the poets are correct, and what are
not, and how they are to be distinguished, and of explaining when
asked the reason of the difference. And I propose to transfer the
question which you and I have been discussing to the domain of poetry;
we will speak as before of virtue, but in reference to a passage of
a poet. Now Simonides says to Scopas the son of Creon the Thessalian:

  Hardly on the one hand can a man become truly good, built
four-square in hands and feet and mind, a work without a flaw.

Do you know the poem? or shall I repeat the whole?

  There is no need, I said; for I am perfectly well acquainted with
the ode-I have made a careful study of it.

  Very well, he said. And do you think that the ode is a good
composition, and true?

  Yes, I said, both good and true.

  But if there is a contradiction, can the composition be good or
true?

  No, not in that case, I replied.

  And is there not a contradiction? he asked. Reflect.

  Well, my friend, I have reflected.

  And does not the poet proceed to say, "I do not agree with the
word of Pittacus, albeit the utterance of a wise man: Hardly can a man
be good"? Now you will observe that this is said by the same poet.

  I know it.

  And do you think, he said, that the two sayings are consistent?

  Yes, I said, I think so (at the same time I could not help fearing
that there might be something in what he said). And you think
otherwise?

  Why, he said, how can he be consistent in both? First of all,
premising as his own thought, "Hardly can a man become truly good";
and then a little further on in the poem, forgetting, and blaming
Pittacus and refusing to agree with him, when he says, "Hardly can a
man be good," which is the very same thing. And yet when he blames him
who says the same with himself, he blames himself; so that he must
be wrong either in his first or his second assertion.

  Many of the audience cheered and applauded this. And I felt at first
giddy and faint, as if I had received a blow from the hand of an
expert boxer, when I heard his words and the sound of the cheering;
and to confess the truth, I wanted to get time to think what the
meaning of the poet really was. So I turned to Prodicus and called
him. Prodicus, I said, Simonides is a countryman of yours, and you
ought to come to his aid. I must appeal to you, like the river
Scamander in Homer, who, when beleaguered by Achilles, summons the
Simois to aid him, saying:

  Brother dear, let us both together stay the force of the hero.

And I summon you, for I am afraid that Protagoras will make an end
of Simonides. Now is the time to rehabilitate Simonides, by the
application of your philosophy of synonyms, which enables you to
distinguish "will" and "wish," and make other charming distinctions
like those which you drew just now. And I should like to know
whether you would agree with me; for I am of opinion that there is
no contradiction in the words of Simonides. And first of all I wish
that you would say whether, in your opinion, Prodicus, "being" is
the same as "becoming."

  Not the same, certainly, replied Prodicus.

  Did not Simonides first set forth, as his own view, that "Hardly can
a man become truly good"?

  Quite right, said Prodicus.

  And then he blames Pittacus, not, as Protagoras imagines, for
repeating that which he says himself, but for saying something
different from himself. Pittacus does not say as Simonides says,
that hardly can a man become good, but hardly can a man be good: and
our friend Prodicus would maintain that being, Protagoras, is not
the same as becoming; and if they are not the same, then Simonides
is not inconsistent with himself. I dare say that Prodicus and many
others would say, as Hesiod says,

   On the one hand, hardly can a man become good,

   For the gods have made virtue the reward of toil,

   But on the other hand, when you have climbed the height,

   Then, to retain virtue, however difficult the acquisition, is easy.

  Prodicus heard and approved; but Protagoras said: Your correction,
Socrates, involves a greater error than is contained in the sentence
which you are correcting.

  Alas! I said, Protagoras; then I am a sorry physician, and do but
aggravate a disorder which I am seeking to cure.

  Such is the fact, he said.

  How so? I asked.

  The poet, he replied, could never have made such a mistake as to say
that virtue, which in the opinion of all men is the hardest of all
things, can be easily retained.

  Well, I said, and how fortunate are we in having Prodicus among
us, at the right moment; for he has a wisdom, Protagoras, which, as
I imagine, is more than human and of very ancient date, and may be
as old as Simonides or even older. Learned as you are in many
things, you appear to know nothing of this; but I know, for I am a
disciple of his. And now, if I am not mistaken, you do not
understand the word "hard" (chalepon) in the sense which Simonides
intended; and I must correct you, as Prodicus corrects me when I use
the word "awful" (deinon) as a term of praise. If I say that
Protagoras or any one else is an "awfully" wise man, he asks me if I
am not ashamed of calling that which is good "awful"; and then he
explains to me that the term "awful" is always taken in a bad sense,
and that no one speaks of being "awfully" healthy or wealthy, or
"awful" peace, but of "awful" disease, "awful" war, "awful" poverty,
meaning by the term "awful," evil. And I think that Simonides and
his countrymen the Ceans, when they spoke of "hard" meant "evil," or
something which you do not understand. Let us ask Prodicus, for he
ought to be able to answer questions about the dialect of Simonides.
What did he mean, Prodicus, by the term "hard?"

  Evil, said Prodicus.

  And therefore, I said, Prodicus, he blames Pittacus for saying,
"Hard is the good," just as if that were equivalent to saying, Evil is
the good.

  Yes, he said, that was certainly his meaning; and he is twitting
Pittacus with ignorance of the use of terms, which in a Lesbian, who
has been accustomed to speak a barbarous language, is natural.

  Do you hear, Protagoras, I asked, what our friend Prodicus is
saying? And have you an answer for him?

  You are entirely mistaken, Prodicus, said Protagoras; and I know
very well that Simonides in using the word "hard" meant what all of us
mean, not evil, but that which is not easy-that which takes a great
deal of trouble: of this I am positive.

  I said: I also incline to believe, Protagoras, that this was the
meaning of Simonides, of which our friend Prodicus was very well
aware, but he thought that he would make fun, and try if you could
maintain your thesis; for that Simonides could never have meant the
other is clearly proved by the context, in which he says that God only
has this gift. Now he cannot surely mean to say that to be good is
evil, when he afterwards proceeds to say that God only has this
gift, and that this is the attribute of him and of no other. For if
this be his meaning, Prodicus would impute to Simonides a character of
recklessness which is very unlike his countrymen. And I should like to
tell you, I said, what I imagine to be the real meaning of Simonides
in this poem, if you will test what, in your way of speaking, would be
called my skill in poetry; or if you would rather, I will be the
listener.

  To this proposal Protagoras replied: As you please;-and Hippias,
Prodicus, and the others told me by all means to do as I proposed.

  Then now, I said, I will endeavour to explain to you my opinion
about this poem of Simonides. There is a very ancient philosophy which
is more cultivated in Crete and Lacedaemon than in any other part of
Hellas, and there are more philosophers in those countries than
anywhere else in the world. This, however, is a secret which the
Lacedaemonians deny; and they pretend to be ignorant, just because
they do not wish to have it thought that they rule the world by
wisdom, like the Sophists of whom Protagoras was speaking, and not
by valour of arms; considering that if the reason of their superiority
were disclosed, all men would be practising their wisdom. And this
secret of theirs has never been discovered by the imitators of
Lacedaemonian fashions in other cities, who go about with their ears
bruised in imitation of them, and have the caestus bound on their
arms, and are always in training, and wear short cloaks; for they
imagine that these are the practices which have enabled the
Lacedaemonians to conquer the other Hellenes. Now when the
Lacedaemonians want to unbend and hold free conversation with their
wise men, and are no longer satisfied with mere secret intercourse,
they drive out all these laconizers, and any other foreigners who
may happen to be in their country, and they hold a philosophical
seance unknown to strangers; and they themselves forbid their young
men to go out into other cities-in this they are like the Cretans-in
order that they may not unlearn the lessons which they have taught
them. And in Lacedaemon and Crete not only men but also women have a
pride in their high cultivation. And hereby you may know that I am
right in attributing to the Lacedaemonians this excellence in
philosophy and speculation: If a man converses with the most
ordinary Lacedaemonian, he will find him seldom good for much in
general conversation, but at any point in the discourse he will be
darting out some notable saying, terse and full of meaning, with
unerring aim; and the person with whom he is talking seems to be
like a child in his hands. And many of our own age and of former
ages have noted that the true Lacedaemonian type of character has
the love of philosophy even stronger than the love of gymnastics; they
are conscious that only a perfectly educated man is capable of
uttering such expressions. Such were Thales of Miletus, and Pittacus
of Mitylene, and Bias of Priene, and our own Solon, and Cleobulus
the Lindian, and Myson the Chenian; and seventh in the catalogue of
wise men was the Lacedaemonian Chilo. All these were lovers and
emulators and disciples of the culture of the Lacedaemonians, and
any one may perceive that their wisdom was of this character;
consisting of short memorable sentences, which they severally uttered.
And they met together and dedicated in the temple of Apollo at Delphi,
as the first-fruits of their wisdom, the far-famed inscriptions, which
are in all men's mouths-"Know thyself," and "Nothing too much."

  Why do I say all this? I am explaining that this Lacedaemonian
brevity was the style of primitive philosophy. Now there was a
saying of Pittacus which was privately circulated and received the
approbation of the wise, "Hard is it to be good." And Simonides, who
was ambitious of the fame of wisdom, was aware that if he could
overthrow this saying, then, as if he had won a victory over some
famous athlete, he would carry off the palm among his
contemporaries. And if I am not mistaken, he composed the entire
poem with the secret intention of damaging Pittacus and his saying.

  Let us all unite in examining his words, and see whether I am
speaking the truth. Simonides must have been a lunatic, if, in the
very first words of the poem, wanting to say only that to become
good is hard, he inserted (men) "on the one hand" ["on the one hand to
become good is hard"]; there would be no reason for the introduction
of (men), unless you suppose him to speak with a hostile reference
to the words of Pittacus. Pittacus is saying "Hard is it to be
good," and he, in refutation of this thesis, rejoins that the truly
hard thing, Pittacus, is to become good, not joining "truly" with
"good," but with "hard." Not, that the hard thing is to be truly good,
as though there were some truly good men, and there were others who
were good but not truly good (this would be a very simple observation,
and quite unworthy of Simonides); but you must suppose him to make a
trajection of the word "truly," construing the saying of Pittacus thus
(and let us imagine Pittacus to be speaking and Simonides answering
him): "O my friends," says Pittacus, "hard is it to be good," and
Simonides answers, "In that, Pittacus, you are mistaken; the
difficulty is not to be good, but on the one hand, to become good,
four-square in hands and feet and mind, without a flaw-that is hard
truly." This way of reading the passage accounts for the insertion
of (men) "on the one hand," and for the position at the end of the
clause of the word "truly," and all that follows shows this to be
the meaning. A great deal might be said in praise of the details of
the poem, which is a charming piece of workmanship, and very finished,
but such minutiae would be tedious. I should like, however, to point
out the general intention of the poem, which is certainly designed
in every part to be a refutation of the saying of Pittacus. For he
speaks in what follows a little further on as if he meant to argue
that although there is a difficulty in becoming good, yet this is
possible for a time, and only for a time. But having become good, to
remain in a good state and be good, as you, Pittacus, affirm, is not
possible, and is not granted to man; God only has this blessing;
"but man cannot help being bad when the force of circumstances
overpowers him." Now whom does the force of circumstance overpower
in the command of a vessel?-not the private individual, for he is
always overpowered; and as one who is already prostrate cannot be
overthrown, and only he who is standing upright but not he who is
prostrate can be laid prostrate, so the force of circumstances can
only overpower him who, at some time or other, has resources, and
not him who is at all times helpless. The descent of a great storm may
make the pilot helpless, or the severity of the season the
husbandman or the physician; for the good may become bad, as another
poet witnesses:

   The good are sometimes good and sometimes bad.

But the bad does not become bad; he is always bad. So that when the
force of circumstances overpowers the man of resources and skill and
virtue, then he cannot help being bad. And you, Pittacus, are
saying, "Hard is it to be good." Now there is a difficulty in becoming
good; and yet this is possible: but to be good is an impossibility-

  For he who does well is the good man, and he who does ill is the
bad.

But what sort of doing is good in letters? and what sort of doing
makes a man good in letters? Clearly the knowing of them. And what
sort of well-doing makes a man a good physician? Clearly the knowledge
of the art of healing the sick. "But he who does ill is the bad."
Now who becomes a bad physician? Clearly he who is in the first
place a physician, and in the second place a good physician; for he
may become a bad one also: but none of us unskilled individuals can by
any amount of doing ill become physicians, any more than we can become
carpenters or anything of that sort; and he who by doing ill cannot
become a physician at all, clearly cannot become a bad physician. In
like manner the good may become deteriorated by time, or toil, or
disease, or other accident (the only real doing ill is to be
deprived of knowledge), but the bad man will never become bad, for
he is always bad; and if he were to become bad, he must previously
have been good. Thus the words of the poem tend to show that on the
one hand a man cannot be continuously good, but that he may become
good and may also become bad; and again that

  They are the best for the longest time whom the gods love.

  All this relates to Pittacus, as is further proved by the sequel.
For he adds:

  Therefore I will not throw away my span of life to no purpose in
searching after the impossible, hoping in vain to find a perfectly
faultless man among those who partake of the fruit of the
broad-bosomed earth: if I find him, I will send you word.

(this is the vehement way in which he pursues his attack upon Pittacus
throughout the whole poem):

  But him who does no evil, voluntarily I praise and love;-not even
the gods war against necessity.

All this has a similar drift, for Simonides was not so ignorant as
to say that he praised those who did no evil voluntarily, as though
there were some who did evil voluntarily. For no wise man, as I
believe, will allow that any human being errs voluntarily, or
voluntarily does evil and dishonourable actions; but they are very
well aware that all who do evil and dishonourable things do them
against their will. And Simonides never says that he praises him who
does no evil voluntarily; the word "voluntarily" applies to himself.
For he was under the impression that a good man might often compel
himself to love and praise another, and to be the friend and
approver of another; and that there might be an involuntary love, such
as a man might feel to an unnatural father or mother, or country, or
the like. Now bad men, when their parents or country have any defects,
look on them with malignant joy, and find fault with them and expose
and denounce them to others, under the idea that the rest of mankind
will be less likely to take themselves to task and accuse them of
neglect; and they blame their defects far more than they deserve, in
order that the odium which is necessarily incurred by them may be
increased: but the good man dissembles his feelings, and constrains
himself to praise them; and if they have wronged him and he is
angry, he pacifies his anger and is reconciled, and compels himself to
love and praise his own flesh and blood. And Simonides, as is
probable, considered that he himself had often had to praise and
magnify a tyrant or the like, much against his will, and he also
wishes to imply to Pittacus that he does not censure him because he is
censorious.

  For I am satisfied [he says] when a man is neither bad nor very
stupid; and when he knows justice (which is the health of states), and
is of sound mind, I will find no fault with him, for I am not given to
finding fault, and there are innumerable fools

(implying that if he delighted in censure he might have abundant
opportunity of finding fault).

  All things are good with which evil is unmingled.

In these latter words he does not mean to say that all things are good
which have no evil in them, as you might say "All things are white
which have no black in them," for that would be ridiculous; but he
means to say that he accepts and finds no fault with the moderate or
intermediate state. He says:

  I do not hope to find a perfectly blameless man among those who
partake of the fruits of the broad-bosomed earth (if I find him, I
will send you word); in this sense I praise no man. But he who is
moderately good, and does no evil, is good enough for me, who love and
approve every one.

(and here observe that he uses a Lesbian word, epainemi [approve],
because he is addressing Pittacus,

  Who love and approve every one voluntarily, who does no evil:

and that the stop should be put after "voluntarily"); "but there are
some whom I involuntarily praise and love. And you, Pittacus, I
would never have blamed, if you had spoken what was moderately good
and true; but I do blame you because, putting on the appearance of
truth, you are speaking falsely about the highest matters. And this, I
said, Prodicus and Protagoras, I take to be the meaning of Simonides
in this poem.

  Hippias said: I think, Socrates, that you have given a very good
explanation of the poem; but I have also an excellent interpretation
of my own which I will propound to you, if you will allow me.

  Nay, Hippias, said Alcibiades; not now, but at some other time. At
present we must abide by the compact which was made between Socrates
and Protagoras, to the effect that as long as Protagoras is willing to
ask, Socrates should answer; or that if he would rather answer, then
that Socrates should ask.

  I said: I wish Protagoras either to ask or answer as he is inclined;
but I would rather have done with poems and odes, if he does not
object, and come back to the question about which I was asking you
at first, Protagoras, and by your help make an end of that. The talk
about the poets seems to me like a commonplace entertainment to
which a vulgar company have recourse; who, because they are not able
to converse or amuse one another, while they are drinking, with the
sound of their own voices and conversation, by reason of their
stupidity, raise the price of flute-girls in the market, hiring for
a great sum the voice of a flute instead of their own breath, to be
the medium of intercourse among them: but where the company are real
gentlemen and men of education, you will see no flute-girls, nor
dancing-girls, nor harp-girls; and they have no nonsense or games, but
are contented with one another's conversation, of which their own
voices are the medium, and which they carry on by turns and in an
orderly manner, even though they are very liberal in their
potations. And a company like this of ours, and men such as we profess
to be, do not require the help of another's voice, or of the poets
whom you cannot interrogate about meaning of what they are saying;
people who cite them declaring, some that the poet has meaning, and
others that he has another, and the point which is in dispute can
never be decided. This sort of entertainment they decline, and
prefer to talk with one another, and put one another to the proof in
conversation. And these are the models which I desire that you and I
should imitate. Leaving the poets, and keeping to ourselves, let us
try the mettle of one another and make proof of the truth in
conversation. If you have a mind to ask, I am ready to answer; or if
you would rather, do you answer, and give me the opportunity of
resuming and completing our unfinished argument.

  I made these and some similar observations; but Protagoras would not
distinctly say which he would do. Thereupon Alcibiades turned to
Callias, and said:-Do you think, Callias, that Protagoras is fair in
refusing to say whether he will or will not answer? for I certainly
think that he is unfair; he ought either to proceed with the argument,
or distinctly refuse to proceed, that we may know his intention; and
then Socrates will be able to discourse with some one else, and the
rest of the company will be free to talk with one another.

  I think that Protagoras was really made ashamed by these words of
Alcibiades and when the prayers of Callias and the company were
superadded, he was at last induced to argue, and said that I might ask
and he would answer.

  So I said: Do not imagine, Protagoras, that I have any other
interest in asking questions of you but that of clearing up my own
difficulties. For I think that Homer was very right in saying that

      When two go together, one sees before the other,

for all men who have a companion are readier in deed, word, or
thought; but if a man

          Sees a thing when he is alone,

he goes about straightway seeking until he finds some one to whom he
may show his discoveries, and who may confirm him in them. And I would
rather hold discourse with you than with any one, because I think that
no man has a better understanding of most things which a good man
may be expected to understand, and in particular of virtue. For who is
there, but you?-who not only claim to be a good man and a gentleman,
for many are this, and yet have not the power of making others good
whereas you are not only good yourself, but also the cause of goodness
in others. Moreover such confidence have you in yourself, that
although other Sophists conceal their profession, you proclaim in
the face of Hellas that you are a Sophist or teacher of virtue and
education, and are the first who demanded pay in return. How then
can I do otherwise than invite you to the examination of these
subjects, and ask questions and consult with you? I must, indeed.
And I should like once more to have my memory refreshed by you about
the questions which I was asking you at first, and also to have your
help in considering them. If I am not mistaken the question was
this: Are wisdom and temperance and courage and justice and holiness
five names of the same thing? or has each of the names a separate
underlying essence and corresponding thing having a peculiar function,
no one of them being like any other of them? And you replied that
the five names were not the names of the same thing, but that each
of them had a separate object, and that all these objects were parts
of virtue, not in the same way that the parts of gold are like each
other and the whole of which they are parts, but as the parts of the
face are unlike the whole of which they are parts and one another, and
have each of them a distinct function. I should like to know whether
this is still your opinion; or if not, I will ask you to define your
meaning, and I shall not take you to task if you now make a
different statement. For I dare say that you may have said what you
did only in order to make trial of me.

  I answer, Socrates, he said, that all these qualities are parts of
virtue, and that four out of the five are to some extent similar,
and that the fifth of them, which is courage, is very different from
the other four, as I prove in this way: You may observe that many
men are utterly unrighteous, unholy, intemperate, ignorant, who are
nevertheless remarkable for their courage.

  Stop, I said; I should like to think about that. When you speak of
brave men, do you mean the confident, or another sort of nature?

  Yes, he said; I mean the impetuous, ready to go at that which others
are afraid to approach.

  In the next place, you would affirm virtue to be a good thing, of
which good thing you assert yourself to be a teacher.

  Yes, he said; I should say the best of all things, if I am in my
right mind.

  And is it partly good and partly bad, I said, or wholly good?

  Wholly good, and in the highest degree.

  Tell me then; who are they who have confidence when diving into a
well?

  I should say, the divers.

  And the reason of this is that they have knowledge?

  Yes, that is the reason.

  And who have confidence when fighting on horseback-the skilled
horseman or the unskilled?

  The skilled.

  And who when fighting with light shields-the peltasts or the
nonpeltasts?

  The peltasts. And that is true of all other things, he said, if that
is your point: those who have knowledge are more confident than
those who have no knowledge, and they are more confident after they
have learned than before.

  And have you not seen persons utterly ignorant, I said, of these
things, and yet confident about them?

  Yes, he said, I have seen such persons far too confident.

  And are not these confident persons also courageous?

  In that case, he replied, courage would be a base thing, for the men
of whom we are speaking are surely madmen.

  Then who are the courageous? Are they not the confident?

  Yes, he said; to that statement I adhere.

  And those, I said, who are thus confident without knowledge are
really not courageous, but mad; and in that case the wisest are also
the most confident, and being the most confident are also the bravest,
and upon that view again wisdom will be courage.

  Nay, Socrates, he replied, you are mistaken in your remembrance of
what was said by me. When you asked me, I certainly did say that the
courageous are the confident; but I was never asked whether the
confident are the courageous; if you had asked me, I should have
answered "Not all of them": and what I did answer you have not
proved to be false, although you proceeded to show that those who have
knowledge are more courageous than they were before they had
knowledge, and more courageous than others who have no knowledge,
and were then led on to think that courage is the same as wisdom.
But in this way of arguing you might come to imagine that strength
is wisdom. You might begin by asking whether the strong are able,
and I should say "Yes"; and then whether those who know how to wrestle
are not more able to wrestle than those who do not know how to
wrestle, and more able after than before they had learned, and I
should assent. And when I had admitted this, you might use my
admissions in such a way as to prove that upon my view wisdom is
strength; whereas in that case I should not have admitted, any more
than in the other, that the able are strong, although I have
admitted that the strong are able. For there is a difference between
ability and strength; the former is given by knowledge as well as by
madness or rage, but strength comes from nature and a healthy state of
the body. And in like manner I say of confidence and courage, that
they are not the same; and I argue that the courageous are
confident, but not all the confident courageous. For confidence may be
given to men by art, and also, like ability, by madness and rage;
but courage comes to them from nature and the healthy state of the
soul.

  I said: You would admit, Protagoras, that some men live well and
others ill?

  He assented.

  And do you think that a man lives well who lives in pain and grief?

  He does not.

  But if he lives pleasantly to the end of his life, will he not in
that case have lived well?

  He will.

  Then to live pleasantly is a good, and to live unpleasantly an evil?

  Yes, he said, if the pleasure be good and honourable.

  And do you, Protagoras, like the rest of the world, call some
pleasant things evil and some painful things good?-for I am rather
disposed to say that things are good in as far as they are pleasant,
if they have no consequences of another sort, and in as far as they
are painful they are bad.

  I do not know, Socrates, he said, whether I can venture to assert in
that unqualified manner that the pleasant is the good and the
painful the evil. Having regard not only to my present answer, but
also to the whole of my life, I shall be safer, if I am not
mistaken, in saying that there are some pleasant things which are
not good, and that there are some painful things which are good, and
some which are not good, and that there are some which are neither
good nor evil.

  And you would call pleasant, I said, the things which participate in
pleasure or create pleasure?

  Certainly, he said.

  Then my meaning is, that in as far as they are pleasant they are
good; and my question would imply that pleasure is a good in itself.

  According to your favourite mode of speech, Socrates, "Let us
reflect about this," he said; and if the reflection is to the point,
and the result proves that pleasure and good are really the same, then
we will agree; but if not, then we will argue.

  And would you wish to begin the enquiry?

  I said; or shall I begin?

  You ought to take the lead, he said; for you are the author of the
discussion.

  May I employ an illustration? I said. Suppose some one who is
enquiring into the health or some other bodily quality of
another:-he looks at his face and at the tips of his fingers, and then
he says, Uncover your chest and back to me that I may have a better
view:-that is the sort of thing which I desire in this speculation.
Having seen what your opinion is about good and pleasure, I am
minded to say to you: Uncover your mind to me, Protagoras, and
reveal your opinion about knowledge, that I may know whether you agree
with the rest of the world. Now the rest of the world are of opinion
that knowledge is a principle not of strength, or of rule, or of
command: their notion is that a man may have knowledge, and yet that
the knowledge which is in him may be overmastered by anger, or
pleasure, or pain, or love, or perhaps by fear,-just as if knowledge
were a slave, and might be dragged about anyhow. Now is that your
view? or do you think that knowledge is a noble and commanding
thing, which cannot be overcome, and will not allow a man, if he
only knows the difference of good and evil, to do anything which is
contrary to knowledge, but that wisdom will have strength to help him?

  I agree with you, Socrates, said Protagoras; and not only so, but I,
above all other men, am bound to say that wisdom and knowledge are the
highest of human things.

  Good, I said, and true. But are you aware that the majority of the
world are of another mind; and that men are commonly supposed to
know the things which are best, and not to do them when they might?
And most persons whom I have asked the reason of this have said that
when men act contrary to knowledge they are overcome by pain, or
pleasure, or some of those affections which I was just now mentioning.

  Yes, Socrates, he replied; and that is not the only point about
which mankind are in error.

  Suppose, then, that you and I endeavour to instruct and inform
them what is the nature of this affection which they call "being
overcome by pleasure," and which they affirm to be the reason why they
do not always do what is best. When we say to them: Friends, you are
mistaken, and are saying what is not true, they would probably
reply: Socrates and Protagoras, if this affection of the soul is not
to be called "being overcome by pleasure," pray, what is it, and by
what name would you describe it?

  But why, Socrates, should we trouble ourselves about the opinion
of the many, who just say anything that happens to occur to them?

  I believe, I said, that they may be of use in helping us to discover
how courage is related to the other parts of virtue. If you are
disposed to abide by our agreement, that I should show the way in
which, as I think, our recent difficulty is most likely to be
cleared up, do you follow; but if not, never mind.

  You are quite right, he said; and I would have you proceed as you
have begun.

  Well then, I said, let me suppose that they repeat their question,
What account do you give of that which, in our way of speaking, is
termed being overcome by pleasure? I should answer thus: Listen, and
Protagoras and I will endeavour to show you. When men are overcome
by eating and drinking and other sensual desires which are pleasant,
and they, knowing them to be evil, nevertheless indulge in them, would
you not say that they were overcome by pleasure? They will not deny
this. And suppose that you and I were to go on and ask them again: "In
what way do you say that they are evil-in that they are pleasant and
give pleasure at the moment, or because they cause disease and poverty
and other like evils in the future? Would they still be evil, if
they had no attendant evil consequences, simply because they give
the consciousness of pleasure of whatever nature?"-Would they not
answer that they are not evil on account of the pleasure which is
immediately given by them, but on account of the after
consequences-diseases and the like?

  I believe, said Protagoras, that the world in general would answer
as you do.

  And in causing diseases do they not cause pain? and in causing
poverty do they not cause pain;-they would agree to that also, if I am
not mistaken?

  Protagoras assented.

  Then I should say to them, in my name and yours: Do you think them
evil for any other reason, except because they end in pain and rob
us of other pleasures:-there again they would agree?

  We both of us thought that they would.

  And then I should take the question from the opposite point of view,
and say: "Friends, when you speak of goods being painful, do you not
mean remedial goods, such as gymnastic exercises, and military
service, and the physician's use of burning, cutting, drugging, and
starving? Are these the things which are good but painful?"-they would
assent to me?

  He agreed.

  "And do you call them good because they occasion the greatest
immediate suffering and pain; or because, afterwards, they bring
health and improvement of the bodily condition and the salvation of
states and power over others and wealth?"-they would agree to the
latter alternative, if I am not mistaken?

  He assented.

  "Are these things good for any other reason except that they end
in pleasure, and get rid of and avert pain? Are you looking to any
other standard but pleasure and pain when you call them good?"-they
would acknowledge that they were not?

  I think so, said Protagoras.

  "And do you not pursue after pleasure as a good, and avoid pain as
an evil?"

  He assented.

  "Then you think that pain is an evil and pleasure is a good: and
even pleasure you deem an evil, when it robs you of greater
pleasures than it gives, or causes pains greater than the pleasure.
If, however, you call pleasure an evil in relation to some other end
or standard, you will be able to show us that standard. But you have
none to show."

  I do not think that they have, said Protagoras.

  "And have you not a similar way of speaking about pain? You call
pain a good when it takes away greater pains than those which it
has, or gives pleasures greater than the pains: then if you have
some standard other than pleasure and pain to which you refer when you
call actual pain a good, you can show what that is. But you cannot."

  True, said Protagoras.

  Suppose again, I said, that the world says to me: "Why do you
spend many words and speak in many ways on this subject?" Excuse me,
friends, I should reply; but in the first place there is a
difficulty in explaining the meaning of the expression "overcome by
pleasure"; and the whole argument turns upon this. And even now, if
you see any possible way in which evil can be explained as other
than pain, or good as other than pleasure, you may still retract.
Are you satisfied, then, at having a life of pleasure which is without
pain? If you are, and if you are unable to show any good or evil which
does not end in pleasure and pain, hear the consequences:-If what
you say is true, then the argument is absurd which affirms that a
man often does evil knowingly, when he might abstain, because he is
seduced and overpowered by pleasure; or again, when you say that a man
knowingly refuses to do what is good because he is overcome at the
moment by pleasure. And that this is ridiculous will be evident if
only we give up the use of various names, such as pleasant and
painful, and good and evil. As there are two things, let us call
them by two names-first, good and evil, and then pleasant and painful.
Assuming this, let us go on to say that a man does evil knowing that
he does evil. But some one will ask, Why? Because he is overcome, is
the first answer. And by what is he overcome? the enquirer will
proceed to ask. And we shall not be able to reply "By pleasure," for
the name of pleasure has been exchanged for that of good. In our
answer, then, we shall only say that he is overcome. "By what?" he
will reiterate. By the good, we shall have to reply; indeed we
shall. Nay, but our questioner will rejoin with a laugh, if he be
one of the swaggering sort, "That is too ridiculous, that a man should
do what he knows to be evil when he ought not, because he is
overcome by good. Is that, he will ask, because the good was worthy or
not worthy of conquering the evil?" And in answer to that we shall
clearly reply, Because it was not worthy; for if it had been worthy,
then he who, as we say, was overcome by pleasure, would not have
been wrong. "But how," he will reply, "can the good be unworthy of the
evil, or the evil of the good?" Is not the real explanation that
they are out of proportion to one another, either as greater and
smaller, or more and fewer? This we cannot deny. And when you speak of
being overcome-"what do you mean," he will say, "but that you choose
the greater evil in exchange for the lesser good?" Admitted. And now
substitute the names of pleasure and pain for good and evil, and
say, not as before, that a man does what is evil knowingly, but that
he does what is painful knowingly, and because he is overcome by
pleasure, which is unworthy to overcome. What measure is there of
the relations of pleasure to pain other than excess and defect,
which means that they become greater and smaller, and more and
fewer, and differ in degree? For if any one says: "Yes, Socrates,
but immediate pleasure differs widely from future pleasure and
pain"-To that I should reply: And do they differ in anything but in
pleasure and pain? There can be no other measure of them. And do
you, like a skilful weigher, put into the balance the pleasures and
the pains, and their nearness and distance, and weigh them, and then
say which outweighs the other. If you weigh pleasures against
pleasures, you of course take the more and greater; or if you weigh
pains against pains, you take the fewer and the less; or if
pleasures against pains, then you choose that course of action in
which the painful is exceeded by the pleasant, whether the distant
by the near or the near by the distant; and you avoid that course of
action in which the pleasant is exceeded by the painful. Would you not
admit, my friends, that this is true? I am confident that they
cannot deny this.

  He agreed with me.

  Well then, I shall say, if you agree so far, be so good as to answer
me a question: Do not the same magnitudes appear larger to your
sight when near, and smaller when at a distance? They will acknowledge
that. And the same holds of thickness and number; also sounds, which
are in themselves equal, are greater when near, and lesser when at a
distance. They will grant that also. Now suppose happiness to
consist in doing or choosing the greater, and in not doing or in
avoiding the less, what would be the saving principle of human life?
Would not the art of measuring be the saving principle; or would the
power of appearance? Is not the latter that deceiving art which
makes us wander up and down and take the things at one time of which
we repent at another, both in our actions and in our choice of
things great and small? But the art of measurement would do away
with the effect of appearances, and, showing the truth, would fain
teach the soul at last to find rest in the truth, and would thus
save our life. Would not mankind generally acknowledge that the art
which accomplishes this result is the art of measurement?

  Yes, he said, the art of measurement.

  Suppose, again, the salvation of human life to depend on the
choice of odd and even, and on the knowledge of when a man ought to
choose the greater or less, either in reference to themselves or to
each other, and whether near or at a distance; what would be the
saving principle of our lives? Would not knowledge?-a knowledge of
measuring, when the question is one of excess and defect, and a
knowledge of number, when the question is of odd and even? The world
will assent, will they not?

  Protagoras himself thought that they would.

  Well then, my friends, I say to them; seeing that the salvation of
human life has been found to consist in the right choice of
pleasures and pains,-in the choice of the more and the fewer, and
the greater and the less, and the nearer and remoter, must not this
measuring be a consideration of their excess and defect and equality
in relation to each other?

  This is undeniably true.

  And this, as possessing measure, must undeniably also be an art
and science?

  They will agree, he said.

  The nature of that art or science will be a matter of future
consideration; but the existence of such a science furnishes a
demonstrative answer to the question which you asked of me and
Protagoras. At the time when you asked the question, if you
remember, both of us were agreeing that there was nothing mightier
than knowledge, and that knowledge, in whatever existing, must have
the advantage over pleasure and all other things; and then you said
that pleasure often got the advantage even over a man who has
knowledge; and we refused to allow this, and you rejoined: O
Protagoras and Socrates, what is the meaning of being overcome by
pleasure if not this?-tell us what you call such a state:-if we had
immediately and at the time answered "Ignorance," you would have
laughed at us. But now, in laughing at us, you will be laughing at
yourselves: for you also admitted that men err in their choice of
pleasures and pains; that is, in their choice of good and evil, from
defect of knowledge; and you admitted further, that they err, not only
from defect of knowledge in general, but of that particular
knowledge which is called measuring. And you are also aware that the
erring act which is done without knowledge is done in ignorance. This,
therefore, is the meaning of being overcome by pleasure;-ignorance,
and that the greatest. And our friends Protagoras and Prodicus and
Hippias declare that they are the physicians of ignorance; but you,
who are under the mistaken impression that ignorance is not the cause,
and that the art of which I am speaking cannot be taught, neither go
yourselves, nor send your children, to the Sophists, who are the
teachers of these things-you take care of your money and give them
none; and the result is, that you are the worse off both in public and
private life:-Let us suppose this to be our answer to the world in
general: And now I should like to ask you, Hippias, and you, Prodicus,
as well as Protagoras (for the argument is to be yours as well as
ours), whether you think that I am speaking the truth or not?

  They all thought that what I said was entirely true.

  Then you agree, I said, that the pleasant is the good, and the
painful evil. And here I would beg my friend Prodicus not to introduce
his distinction of names, whether he is disposed to say pleasurable,
delightful, joyful. However, by whatever name he prefers to call them,
I will ask you, most excellent Prodicus, to answer in my sense of
the words.

  Prodicus laughed and assented, as did the others.

  Then, my friends, what do you say to this? Are not all actions
honourable and useful, of which the tendency is to make life
painless and pleasant? The honourable work is also useful and good?

  This was admitted.

  Then, I said, if the pleasant is the good, nobody does anything
under the idea or conviction that some other thing would be better and
is also attainable, when he might do the better. And this
inferiority of a man to himself is merely ignorance, as the
superiority of a man to himself is wisdom.

  They all assented.

  And is not ignorance the having a false opinion and being deceived
about important matters?

  To this also they unanimously assented.

  Then, I said, no man voluntarily pursues evil, or that which he
thinks to be evil. To prefer evil to good is not in human nature;
and when a man is compelled to choose one of two evils, no one will
choose the greater when he may have the less.

  All of us agreed to every word of this.

  Well, I said, there is a certain thing called fear or terror; and
here, Prodicus, I should particularly like to know whether you would
agree with me in defining this fear or terror as expectation of evil.

  Protagoras and Hippias agreed, but Prodicus said that this was
fear and not terror.

  Never mind, Prodicus, I said; but let me ask whether, if our
former assertions are true, a man will pursue that which he fears when
he is not compelled? Would not this be in flat contradiction to the
admission which has been already made, that he thinks the things which
he fears to be evil; and no one will pursue or voluntarily accept that
which he thinks to be evil?

  That also was universally admitted.

  Then, I said, these, Hippias and Prodicus, are our premisses; and
I would beg Protagoras to explain to us how he can be right in what he
said at first. I do not mean in what he said quite at first, for his
first statement, as you may remember, was that whereas there were five
parts of virtue none of them was like any other of them; each of
them had a separate function. To this, however, I am not referring,
but to the assertion which he afterwards made that of the five virtues
four were nearly akin to each other, but that the fifth, which was
courage, differed greatly from the others. And of this he gave me
the following proof. He said: You will find, Socrates, that some of
the most impious, and unrighteous, and intemperate, and ignorant of
men are among the most courageous; which proves that courage is very
different from the other parts of virtue. I was surprised at his
saying this at the time, and I am still more surprised now that I have
discussed the matter with you. So I asked him whether by the brave
he meant the confident. Yes, he replied, and the impetuous or goers.
(You may remember, Protagoras, that this was your answer.)

  He assented.

  Well then, I said, tell us against what are the courageous ready
to go-against the same dangers as the cowards?

  No, he answered.

  Then against something different?

  Yes, he said.

  Then do cowards go where there is safety, and the courageous where
there is danger?

  Yes, Socrates, so men say.

  Very true, I said. But I want to know against what do you say that
the courageous are ready to go-against dangers, believing them to be
dangers, or not against dangers?

  No, said he; the former case has been proved by you in the
previous argument to be impossible.

  That, again, I replied, is quite true. And if this has been
rightly proven, then no one goes to meet what he thinks to be dangers,
since the want of self-control, which makes men rush into dangers, has
been shown to be ignorance.

  He assented.

  And yet the courageous man and the coward alike go to meet that
about which they are confident; so that, in this point of view, the
cowardly and the courageous go to meet the same things.

  And yet, Socrates, said Protagoras, that to which the coward goes is
the opposite of that to which the courageous goes; the one, for
example, is ready to go to battle, and the other is not ready.

  And is going to battle honourable or disgraceful? I said.

  Honourable, he replied.

  And if honourable, then already admitted by us to be good; for all
honourable actions we have admitted to be good.

  That is true; and to that opinion I shall always adhere.

  True, I said. But which of the two are they who, as you say, are
unwilling to go to war, which is a good and honourable thing?

  The cowards, he replied.

  And what is good and honourable, I said, is also pleasant?

  It has certainly been acknowledged to be so, he replied.

  And do the cowards knowingly refuse to go to the nobler, and
pleasanter, and better?

  The admission of that, he replied, would belie our former
admissions.

  But does not the courageous man also go to meet the better, and
pleasanter, and nobler?

  That must be admitted.

  And the courageous man has no base fear or base confidence?

  True, he replied.

  And if not base, then honourable?

  He admitted this.

  And if honourable, then good?

  Yes.

  But the fear and confidence of the coward or foolhardy or madman, on
the contrary, are base?

  He assented.

  And these base fears and confidences originate in ignorance and
uninstructedness?

  True, he said.

  Then as to the motive from which the cowards act, do you call it
cowardice or courage?

  I should say cowardice, he replied.

  And have they not been shown to be cowards through their ignorance
of dangers?

  Assuredly, he said.

  And because of that ignorance they are cowards?

  He assented.

  And the reason why they are cowards is admitted by you to be
cowardice?

  He again assented.

  Then the ignorance of what is and is not dangerous is cowardice?

  He nodded assent.

  But surely courage, I said, is opposed to cowardice?

  Yes.

  Then the wisdom which knows what are and are not dangers is
opposed to the ignorance of them?

  To that again he nodded assent.

  And the ignorance of them is cowardice?

  To that he very reluctantly nodded assent.

  And the knowledge of that which is and is not dangerous is
courage, and is opposed to the ignorance of these things?

  At this point he would no longer nod assent, but was silent.

  And why, I said, do you neither assent nor dissent, Protagoras?

  Finish the argument by yourself, he said.

  I only want to ask one more question, I said. I want to know whether
you still think that there are men who are most ignorant and yet
most courageous?

  You seem to have a great ambition to make me answer, Socrates, and
therefore I will gratify you, and say, that this appears to me to be
impossible consistently with the argument.

  My only object, I said, in continuing the discussion, has been the
desire to ascertain the nature and relations of virtue; for if this
were clear, I am very sure that the other controversy which has been
carried on at great length by both of us-you affirming and I denying
that virtue can be taught-would also become clear. The result of our
discussion appears to me to be singular. For if the argument had a
human voice, that voice would be heard laughing at us and saying:
"Protagoras and Socrates, you are strange beings; there are you,
Socrates, who were saying that virtue cannot be taught,
contradicting yourself now by your attempt to prove that all things
are knowledge, including justice, and temperance, and courage,-which
tends to show that virtue can certainly be taught; for if virtue
were other than knowledge, as Protagoras attempted to prove, then
clearly virtue cannot be taught; but if virtue is entirely
knowledge, as you are seeking to show, then I cannot but suppose
that virtue is capable of being taught. Protagoras, on the other hand,
who started by saying that it might be taught, is now eager to prove
it to be anything rather than knowledge; and if this is true, it
must be quite incapable of being taught." Now I, Protagoras,
perceiving this terrible confusion of our ideas, have a great desire
that they should be cleared up. And I should like to carry on the
discussion until we ascertain what virtue is, whether capable of being
taught or not, lest haply Epimetheus should trip us up and deceive
us in the argument, as he forgot us in the story; I prefer your
Prometheus to your Epimetheus, for of him I make use, whenever I am
busy about these questions, in Promethean care of my own life. And
if you have no objection, as I said at first, I should like to have
your help in the enquiry.

  Protagoras replied: Socrates, I am not of a base nature, and I am
the last man in the world to be envious. I cannot but applaud your
energy and your conduct of an argument. As I have often said, I admire
you above all men whom I know, and far above all men of your age;
and I believe that you will become very eminent in philosophy. Let
us come back to the subject at some future time; at present we had
better turn to something else.

  By all means, I said, if that is your wish; for I too ought long
since to have kept the engagement of which I spoke before, and only
tarried because I could not refuse the request of the noble Callias.
So the conversation ended, and we went our way.

                             -THE END-
.
                                     380 BC

                              LYSIS, OR FRIENDSHIP

                                    by Plato

                         translated by Benjamin Jowett

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES, who is the narrator; MENEXENUS;
HIPPOTHALES; LYSIS; CTESIPPUS. Scene: A newly-erected Palaestra
outside the walls of Athens.

  I was going from the Academy straight to the Lyceum, intending to
take the outer road, which is close under the wall. When I came to the
postern gate of the city, which is by the fountain of Panops, I fell
in with Hippothales, the son of Hieronymus, and Ctesippus the
Paeanian, and a company of young men who were standing with them.
Hippothales, seeing me approach, asked whence I came and whither I was
going.

  I am going, I replied, from the Academy straight to the Lyceum.

  Then come straight to us, he said, and put in here; you may as well.

  Who are you, I said; and where am I to come?

  He showed me an enclosed space and an open door over against the
wall. And there, he said, is the building at which we all meet: and
a goodly company we are.

  And what is this building, I asked; and what sort of entertainment
have you?

  The building, he replied, is a newly erected Palaestra; and the
entertainment is generally conversation, to which you are welcome.

  Thank you, I said; and is there any teacher there?

  Yes, he said, your old friend and admirer, Miccus.

  Indeed, I replied; he is a very eminent professor.

  Are you disposed, he said, to go with me and see them?

  Yes, I said; but I should like to know first, what is expected of
me, and who is the favourite among you?

  Some persons have one favourite, Socrates, and some another, he
said.

  And who is yours? I asked: tell me that, Hippothales.

  At this he blushed; and I said to him, O Hippothales, thou son of
Hieronymus! do not say that you are, or that you are not, in love; the
confession is too late; for I see that you are not only in love, but
are already far gone in your love. Simple and foolish as I am, the
Gods have given me the power of understanding affections of this kind.

  Whereupon he blushed more and more.

  Ctesippus said: I like to see you blushing, Hippothales, and
hesitating to tell Socrates the name; when, if he were with you but
for a very short time, you would have plagued him to death by
talking about nothing else. Indeed, Socrates, he has literally
deafened us, and stopped our ears with the praises of Lysis; and if he
is a little intoxicated, there is every likelihood that we may have
our sleep murdered with a cry of Lysis. His performances in prose
are bad enough, but nothing at all in comparison with his verse; and
when he drenches us with his poems and other compositions, it is
really too bad; and worse still is his manner of singing them to his
love; he has a voice which is truly appalling, and we cannot help
hearing him: and now having a question put to him by you, behold he is
blushing.

  Who is Lysis? I said: I suppose that he must be young; for the
name does not recall any one to me.

  Why, he said, his father being a very well known man, he retains his
patronymic, and is not as yet commonly called by his own name; but,
although you do not know his name, I am sure that you must know his
face, for that is quite enough to distinguish him.

  But tell me whose son he is, I said.

  He is the eldest son of Democrates, of the deme of Aexone.

  Ah, Hippothales, I said; what a noble and really perfect love you
have found! I wish that you would favour me with the exhibition
which you have been making to the rest of the company, and then I
shall be able to judge whether you know what a lover ought to say
about his love, either to the youth himself, or to others.

  Nay, Socrates, he said; you surely do not attach any importance to
what he is saying.

  Do you mean, I said, that you disown the love of the person whom
he says that you love?

  No; but I deny that I make verses or address compositions to him.

  He is not in his right mind, said Ctesippus; he is talking nonsense,
and is stark mad.

  O Hippothales, I said, if you have ever made any verses or songs
in honour of your favourite, I do not want to hear them; but I want to
know the purport of them, that I may be able to judge of your mode
of approaching your fair one.

  Ctesippus will be able to tell you, he said; for if, as he avers,
the sound of my words is always dinning in his ears, he must have a
very accurate knowledge and recollection of them.

  Yes, indeed, said Ctesippus; I know only too well; and very
ridiculous the tale is: for although he is a lover, and very devotedly
in love, he has nothing particular to talk about to his beloved
which a child might not say. Now is not that ridiculous? He can only
speak of the wealth of Democrates, which the whole city celebrates,
and grandfather Lysis, and the other ancestors of the youth, and their
stud of horses, and their victory at the Pythian games, and at the
Isthmus, and at Nemea with four horses and single horses-these are the
tales which he composes and repeats. And there is greater twaddle
still. Only the day before yesterday he made a poem in which he
described the entertainment of Heracles, who was a connexion of the
family, setting forth how in virtue of this relationship he was
hospitably received by an ancestor of Lysis; this ancestor was himself
begotten of Zeus by the daughter of the founder of the deme. And these
are the sort of old wives' tales which he sings and recites to us, and
we are obliged to listen to him.

  When I heard this, I said: O ridiculous Hippothales! how can you
be making and singing hymns in honour of yourself before you have won?

  But my songs and verses, he said, are not in honour of myself,
Socrates.

  You think not? I said.

  Nay, but what do you think? he replied.

  Most assuredly, I said, those songs are all in your own honour;
for if you win your beautiful love, your discourses and songs will
be a glory, to you, and may be truly regarded as hymns of praise
composed in honour of you who have conquered and won such a love;
but if he slips away from you, the more you have praised him, the more
ridiculous you will look at having lost this fairest and best of
blessings; and therefore the wise lover does not praise his beloved
until he has won him, because he is afraid of accidents. There is also
another danger; the fair, when any one praises or magnifies them,
are filled with the spirit of pride and vain-glory. Do you not agree
with me?

  Yes, he said.

  And the more vain-glorious they are, the more difficult is the
capture of them?

  I believe you.

  What should you say of a hunter who frightened away his prey, and
made the capture of the animals which he is hunting more difficult?

  He would be a bad hunter, undoubtedly.

  Yes; and if, instead of soothing them, he were to infuriate them
with words and songs, that would show a great want of wit: do you
not agree.

  Yes.

  And now reflect, Hippothales, and see whether you are not guilty
of all these errors in writing poetry. For I can hardly suppose that
you will affirm a man to be a good poet who injures himself by his
poetry.

  Assuredly not, he said; such a poet would be a fool. And this is the
reason why I take you into my counsels, Socrates, and I shall be
glad of any further advice which you may have to offer. Will you
tell me by what words or actions I may become endeared to my love?

  That is not easy to determine, I said; but if you will bring your
love to me, and will let me talk with him, I may perhaps be able to
show you how to converse with him, instead of singing and reciting
in the fashion of which you are accused.

  There will be no difficulty in bringing him, he replied; if you will
only go with Ctesippus into the Palaestra, and sit down and talk, I
believe that he will come of his own accord; for he is fond of
listening, Socrates. And as this is the festival of the Hermaea, the
young men and boys are all together, and there is no separation
between them. He will be sure to come: but if he does not, Ctesippus
with whom he is familiar, and whose relation Menexenus is his great
friend, shall call him.

  That will be the way, I said. Thereupon I led Ctesippus into the
Palaestra, and the rest followed.

  Upon entering we found that the boys had just been sacrificing;
and this part of the festival was nearly at an end. They were all in
their white array, and games at dice were going on among them. Most of
them were in the outer court amusing themselves; but some were in a
corner of the Apodyterium playing at odd and even with a number of
dice, which they took out of little wicker baskets. There was also a
circle of lookers-on; among them was Lysis. He was standing with the
other boys and youths, having a crown upon his head, like a fair
vision, and not less worthy of praise for his goodness than for his
beauty. We left them, and went over to the opposite side of the
room, where, finding a quiet place, we sat down; and then we began
to talk. This attracted Lysis, who was constantly turning round to
look at us -he was evidently wanting to come to us. For a time he
hesitated and had not the courage to come alone; but first of all, his
friend Menexenus, leaving his play, entered the Palaestra from the
court, and when he saw Ctesippus and myself, was going to take a
seat by us; and then Lysis, seeing him, followed, and sat down by
his side; and the other boys joined. I should observe that
Hippothales, when he saw the crowd, got behind them, where he
thought that he would be out of sight of Lysis, lest he should anger
him; and there he stood and listened.

  I turned to Menexenus, and said: Son of Demophon, which of you two
youths is the elder?

  That is a matter of dispute between us, he said.

  And which is the nobler? Is that also a matter of dispute?

  Yes, certainly.

  And another disputed point is, which is the fairer?

  The two boys laughed.

  I shall not ask which is the richer of the two, I said; for you
are friends, are you not?

  Certainly, they replied.

  And friends have all things in common, so that one of you can be
no richer than the other, if you say truly that you are friends.

  They assented. I was about to ask which was the juster of the two,
and which was the wiser of the two; but at this moment Menexenus was
called away by some one who came and said that the gymnastic-master
wanted him. I supposed that he had to offer sacrifice. So he went
away, and I asked Lysis some more questions. I dare say, Lysis, I
said, that your father and mother love you very much.

  Certainly, he said.

  And they would wish you to be perfectly happy.

  Yes.

  But do you think that any one is happy who is in the condition of
a slave, and who cannot do what he likes?

  I should think not indeed, he said.

  And if your father and mother love you, and desire that you should
be happy, no one can doubt that they are very ready to promote your
happiness.

  Certainly, he replied.

  And do they then permit you to do what you like, and never rebuke
you or hinder you from doing what you desire?

  Yes, indeed, Socrates; there are a great many things which they
hinder me from doing.

  What do you mean? I said. Do they want you to be happy, and yet
hinder you from doing what you like? For example, if you want to mount
one of your father's chariots, and take the reins at a race, they will
not allow you to do so-they will prevent you?

  Certainly, he said, they will not allow me to do so.

  Whom then will they allow?

  There is a charioteer, whom my father pays for driving.

  And do they trust a hireling more than you? and may he do what he
likes with the horses? and do they pay him for this?

  They do.

  But I dare say that you may take the whip and guide the mule-cart if
you like;-they will permit that?

  Permit me! indeed they will not.

  Then, I said, may no one use the whip to the mules?

  Yes, he said, the muleteer.

  And is he a slave or a free man?

  A slave, he said.

  And do they esteem a slave of more value than you who are their son?
And do they entrust their property to him rather than to you? and
allow him to do what he likes, when they prohibit you? Answer me
now: Are you your own master, or do they not even allow that?

  Nay, he said; of course they do not allow it.

  Then you have a master?

  Yes, my tutor; there he is.

  And is he a slave?

  To be sure; he is our slave, he replied.

  Surely, I said, this is a strange thing, that a free man should be
governed by a slave. And what does he do with you?

  He takes me to my teachers.

  You do not mean to say that your teachers also rule over you?

  Of course they do.

  Then I must say that your father is pleased to inflict many lords
and masters on you. But at any rate when you go home to your mother,
she will let you have your own way, and will not interfere with your
happiness; her wool, or the piece of cloth which she is weaving, are
at your disposal: I am sure that there is nothing to hinder you from
touching her wooden spathe, or her comb, or any other of her
spinning implements.

  Nay, Socrates, he replied, laughing; not only does she hinder me,
but I should be beaten if I were to touch one of them.

  Well, I said, this is amazing. And did you ever behave ill to your
father or your mother?

  No, indeed, he replied.

  But why then are they so terribly anxious to prevent you from
being happy, and doing as you like?-keeping you all day long in
subjection to another, and, in a word, doing nothing which you desire;
so that you have no good, as would appear, out of their great
possessions, which are under the control of anybody rather than of
you, and have no use of your own fair person, which is tended and
taken care of by another; while you, Lysis, are master of nobody,
and can do nothing?

  Why, he said, Socrates, the reason is that I am not of age.

  I doubt whether that is the real reason, I said; for I should
imagine that your father Democrates, and your mother, do permit you to
do many things already, and do not wait until you are of age: for
example, if they want anything read or written, you, I presume,
would be the first person in the house who is summoned by them.

  Very true.

  And you would be allowed to write or read the letters in any order
which you please, or to take up the lyre and tune the notes, and
play with the fingers, or strike with the plectrum, exactly as you
please, and neither father nor mother would interfere with you.

  That is true, he said.

  Then what can be the reason, Lysis, I said, why they allow you to do
the one and not the other?

  I suppose, he said, because I understand the one, and not the other.

  Yes, my dear youth, I said, the reason is not any deficiency of
years, but a deficiency of knowledge; and whenever your father
thinks that you are wiser than he is, he will instantly commit himself
and his possessions to you.

  I think so.

  Aye, I said; and about your neighbour, too, does not the same rule
hold as about your father? If he is satisfied that you know more of
housekeeping than he does, will he continue to administer his
affairs himself, or will he commit them to you?

  I think that he will commit them to me.

  Will not the Athenian people, too, entrust their affairs to you when
they see that you have wisdom enough to manage them?

  Yes.

  And oh! let me put another case, I said: There is the great king,
and he has an eldest son, who is the Prince of Asia;-suppose that
you and I go to him and establish to his satisfaction that we are
better cooks than his son, will he not entrust to us the prerogative
of making soup, and putting in anything that we like while the pot
is boiling, rather than to the Prince of Asia, who is his son?

  To us, clearly.

  And we shall be allowed to throw in salt by handfuls, whereas the
son will not be allowed to put in as much as he can take up between
his fingers?

  Of course.

  Or suppose again that the son has bad eyes, will he allow him, or
will he not allow him, to touch his own eyes if he thinks that he
has no knowledge of medicine?

  He will not allow him.

  Whereas, if he supposes us to have a knowledge of medicine, he
will allow us to do what we like with him-even to open the eyes wide
and sprinkle ashes upon them, because he supposes that we know what is
best?

  That is true.

  And everything in which we appear to him to be wiser than himself or
his son he will commit to us?

  That is very true, Socrates, he replied.

  Then now, my dear Lysis, I said, you perceive that in things which
we know every one will trust us-Hellenes and barbarians, men and
women-and we may do as we please about them, and no one will like to
interfere with us; we shall be free, and masters of others; and
these things will be really ours, for we shall be benefited by them.
But in things of which we have no understanding, no one will trust
us to do as seems good to us-they will hinder us as far as they can;
and not only strangers, but father and mother, and the friend, if
there be one, who is dearer still, will also hinder us; and we shall
be subject to others; and these things will not be ours, for we
shall not be benefited by them. Do you agree?

  He assented.

  And shall we be friends to others, and will any others love us, in
as far as we are useless to them?

  Certainly not.

  Neither can your father or mother love you, nor can anybody love
anybody else, in so far as they are useless to them?

  No.

  And therefore, my boy, if you are wise, -all men will be your
friends and kindred, for you will be useful and good; but if you are
not wise, neither father, nor mother, nor kindred, nor any one else,
will be your friends. And in matters of which you have as yet no
knowledge, can you have any conceit of knowledge?

  That is impossible, he replied.

  And you, Lysis, if you require a teacher, have not yet attained to
wisdom.

  True.

  And therefore you are not conceited, having nothing of which to be
conceited.

  Indeed, Socrates, I think not.

  When I heard him say this, I turned to Hippothales, and was very
nearly making a blunder, for I was going to say to him: That is the
way, Hippothales, in which you should talk to your beloved, humbling
and lowering him, and not as you do, puffing him up and spoiling
him. But I saw that he was in great excitement and confusion at what
had been said, and I remembered that, although he was in the
neighbourhood, he did not want to be seen by Lysis; so upon second
thoughts I refrained.

  In the meantime Menexenus came back and sat down in his place by
Lysis; and Lysis, in a childish and affectionate manner, whispered
privately in my ear, so that Menexenus should not hear: Do,
Socrates, tell Menexenus what you have been telling me.

  Suppose that you tell him yourself, Lysis, I replied; for I am
sure that you were attending.

  Certainly, he replied.

  Try, then, to remember the words, and be as exact as you can in
repeating them to him, and if you have forgotten anything, ask me
again the next time that you see me.

  I will be sure to do so, Socrates; but go on telling him something
new, and let me hear, as long as I am allowed to stay.

  I certainly cannot refuse, I said, since you ask me; but then, as
you know, Menexenus is very pugnacious, and therefore you must come to
the rescue if he attempts to upset me.

  Yes, indeed, he said; he is very pugnacious, and that is the
reason why I want you to argue with him.

  That I may make a fool of myself?

  No, indeed, he said; but I want you to put him down.

  That is no easy matter, I replied; for he is a terrible fellow-a
pupil of Ctesippus. And there is Ctesippus himself: do you see him?

  Never mind, Socrates, you shall argue with him.

  Well, I suppose that I must, I replied.

  Hereupon Ctesippus complained that we were talking in secret, and
keeping the feast to ourselves.

  I shall be happy, I said, to let you have a share. Here is Lysis,
who does not understand something that I was saying, and wants me to
ask Menexenus, who, as he thinks, is likely to know.

  And why do you not ask him? he said.

  Very well, I said, I will; and do you, Menexenus, answer. But
first I must tell you that I am one who from my childhood upward
have set my heart upon a certain thing. All people have their fancies;
some desire horses, and others dogs; and some are fond of gold, and
others of honour. Now, I have no violent desire of any of these
things; but I have a passion for friends; and I would rather have a
good friend than the best cock or quail in the world: I would even
go further, and say the best horse or dog. Yea, by the dog of Egypt, I
should greatly prefer a real friend to all the gold of Darius, or even
to Darius himself: I am such a lover of friends as that. And when I
see you and Lysis, at your early age, so easily possessed of this
treasure, and so soon, he of you, and you of him, I am amazed and
delighted, seeing that I myself, although I am now advanced in
years, am so far from having made a similar acquisition, that I do not
even know in what way a friend is acquired. But want to ask you a
question about this, for you have experience: tell me then, when one
loves another, is the lover or the beloved the friend; or may either
be the friend?

  Either may, I should think, be the friend of either.

  Do you mean, I said, that if only one of them loves the other,
they are mutual friends?

  Yes, he said; that is my meaning.

  But what if the lover is not loved in return? which is a very
possible case.

  Yes.

  Or is, perhaps, even hated? which is a fancy which sometimes is
entertained by lovers respecting their beloved. Nothing can exceed
their love; and yet they imagine either that they are not loved in
return, or that they are hated. Is not that true?

  Yes, he said, quite true.

  In that case, the one loves, and the other is loved?

  Yes.

  Then which is the friend of which? Is the lover the friend of the
beloved, whether he be loved in return, or hated; or is the beloved
the friend; or is there no friendship at all on either side, unless
they both love one another?

  There would seem to be none at all.

  Then this notion is not in accordance with our previous one. We were
saying that both were friends, if one only loved; but now, unless they
both love, neither is a friend.

  That appears to be true.

  Then nothing which does not love in return is beloved by a lover?

  I think not.

  Then they are not lovers of horses, whom the horses do not love in
return; nor lovers of quails, nor of dogs, nor of wine, nor of
gymnastic exercises, who have no return of love; no, nor of wisdom,
unless wisdom loves them in return. Or shall we say that they do
love them, although they are not beloved by them; and that the poet
was wrong who sings-

  Happy the man to whom his children are dear, and steeds having
single hoofs, and dogs of chase, and the stranger of another land?

  I do not think that he was wrong.

  You think that he is right?

  Yes.

  Then, Menexenus, the conclusion is, that what is beloved, whether
loving or hating, may be dear to the lover of it: for example, very
young children, too young to love, or even hating their father or
mother when they are punished by them, are never dearer to them than
at the time when they are being hated by them.

  I think that what you say is true.

  And, if so, not the lover, but the beloved, is the friend or dear
one?

  Yes.

  And the hated one, and not the hater, is the enemy?

  Clearly.

  Then many men are loved by their enemies, and hated by their
friends, and are the friends of their enemies, and the enemies of
their friends. Yet how absurd, my dear friend, or indeed impossible is
this paradox of a man being an enemy to his friend or a friend to
his enemy.

  I quite agree, Socrates, in what you say.

  But if this cannot be, the lover will be the friend of that which is
loved?

  True.

  And the hater will be the enemy of that which is hated?

  Certainly.

  Yet we must acknowledge in this, as in the preceding instance,
that a man may be the friend of one who is not his friend, or who
may be his enemy, when he loves that which does not love him or
which even hates him. And he may be the enemy of one who is not his
enemy, and is even his friend: for example, when he hates that which
does not hate him, or which even loves him.

  That appears to be true.

  But if the lover is not a friend, nor the beloved a friend, nor both
together, what are we to say? Whom are we to call friends to one
another? Do any remain?

  Indeed, Socrates, I cannot find any.

  But, O Menexenus! I said, may we not have been altogether wrong in
our conclusions?

  I am sure that we have been wrong, Socrates, said Lysis. And he
blushed as he spoke, the words seeming to come from his lips
involuntarily, because his whole mind was taken up with the
argument; there was no mistaking his attentive look while he was
listening.

  I was pleased at the interest which was shown by Lysis, and I wanted
to give Menexenus a rest, so I turned to him and said, I think, Lysis,
that what you say is true, and that, if we had been right, we should
never have gone so far wrong; let us proceed no further in this
direction (for the road seems to be getting troublesome), but take the
other path into which we turned, and see what the poets have to say;
for they are to us in a manner the fathers and authors of wisdom,
and they speak of friends in no light or trivial manner, but God
himself, as they say, makes them and draws them to one another; and
this they express, if I am not mistaken, in the following words:-

        God is ever drawing like towards like, and

               making them acquainted.

I dare say that you have heard those words.

  Yes, he said; I have.

  And have you not also met with the treatises of philosophers who say
that like must love like? they are the people who argue and write
about nature and the universe.

  Very true, he replied.

  And are they right in saying this?

  They may be.

  Perhaps, I said, about half, or possibly, altogether, right, if
their meaning were rightly apprehended by us. For the more a bad man
has to do with a bad man, and the more nearly he is brought into
contact with him, the more he will be likely to hate him, for he
injures him; and injurer and injured cannot be friends. Is not that
true?

  Yes, he said.

  Then one half of the saying is untrue, if the wicked are like one
another?

  That is true.

  But the real meaning of the saying, as I imagine, is, that, the good
are like one another, friends to one another; and that the bad, as
is often said of them, are never at unity with one another or with
themselves; for they are passionate and restless, and anything which
is at variance and enmity with itself is not likely to be in union
or harmony with any other thing. Do you not agree?

  Yes, I do.

  Then, my friend, those who say that the like is friendly to the like
mean to intimate, if I rightly apprehend them, that the good only is
the friend of the good, and of him only; but that the evil never
attains to any real friendship, either with good or evil. Do you
agree?

  He nodded assent.

  Then now we know how to answer the question "Who are friends? for
the argument declares "That the good are friends."

  Yes, he said, that is true.

  Yes, I replied; and yet I am not quite satisfied with this answer.
By heaven, and shall I tell you what I suspect? I will. Assuming
that like, inasmuch as he is like, is the friend of like, and useful
to him-or rather let me try another way of putting the matter: Can
like do any good or harm to like which he could not do to himself,
or suffer anything from his like which he would not suffer from
himself? And if neither can be of any use to the other, how can they
be loved by one another? Can they now?

  They cannot.

  And can he who is not loved be a friend?

  Certainly not.

  But say that the like is not the friend of the like in so far as
he is like; still the good may be the friend of the good in so far
as he is good?

  True.

  But then again, will not the good, in so far as he is good, be
sufficient for himself? Certainly he will. And he who is sufficient
wants nothing-that is implied in the word sufficient.

  Of course not.

  And he who wants nothing will desire nothing?

  He will not.

  Neither can he love that which he does not desire?

  He cannot.

  And he who not is not a lover of friend?

  Clearly not.

  What place then is there for friendship, if, when absent, good men
have no need of one another (for even when alone they are sufficient
for themselves), and when present have no use of one another? How
can such persons ever be induced to value one another?

  They cannot.

  And friends they cannot be, unless they value one another?

  Very true.

  But see now, Lysis, whether we are not being deceived in all
this-are we not indeed entirely wrong?

  How so? he replied.

  Have I not heard some one say, as I just now recollect, that the
like is the greatest enemy of the like, the good of the good?-Yes, and
he quoted the authority of Hesiod, who says:

     Potter quarrels with potter, hard with bard,

     Beggar with beggar;

and of all other things he affirmed, in like manner, "That of
necessity the most like are most full of envy, strife, and hatred of
one another, and the most unlike, of friendship. For the poor man is
compelled to be the friend of the rich, and the weak requires the
aid of the strong, and the sick man of the physician; and every one
who is ignorant, has to love and court him who knows." And indeed he
went on to say in grandiloquent language, that the idea of
friendship existing between similars is not the truth, but the very
reverse of the truth, and that the most opposed are the most friendly;
for that everything desires not like but that which is most unlike:
for example, the dry desires the moist, the cold the hot, the bitter
the sweet, the sharp the blunt, the void the full, the full the
void, and so of all other things; for the opposite is the food of
the opposite, whereas like receives nothing from like. And I thought
that he who said this was a charming man, and that he spoke well. What
do the rest of you say?

  I should say, at first hearing, that he is right, said Menexenus.

  Then we are to say that the greatest friendship is of opposites?

  Exactly.

  Yes, Menexenus; but will not that be a monstrous answer? and will
not the all-wise eristics be down upon us in triumph, and ask,
fairly enough, whether love is not the very opposite of hate; and what
answer shall we make to them-must we not admit that they speak the
truth?

  We must.

  They will then proceed to ask whether the enemy is the friend of the
friend, or the friend the friend of the enemy?

  Neither, he replied.

  Well, but is a just man the friend of the unjust, or the temperate
of the intemperate, or the good of the bad?

  I do not see how that is possible.

  And yet, I said, if friendship goes by contraries, the contraries
must be friends.

  They must.

  Then neither like and like nor unlike and unlike are friends.

  I suppose not.

  And yet there is a further consideration: may not all these
notions of friendship be erroneous? but may not that which is
neither good nor evil still in some cases be the friend of the good?

  How do you mean? he said.

  Why really, I said, the truth is that I do not know; but my head
is dizzy with thinking of the argument, and therefore I hazard the
conjecture, that "the beautiful is the friend," as the old proverb
says. Beauty is certainly a soft, smooth, slippery thing, and
therefore of a nature which easily slips in and permeates our souls.
For I affirm that the good is the beautiful. You will agree to that?

  Yes.

  This I say from a sort of notion that what is neither good nor
evil is the friend of the beautiful and the good, and I will tell
you why I am inclined to think so: I assume that there are three
principles-the good, the bad, and that which is neither good nor
bad. You would agree-would you not?

  I agree.

  And neither is the good the friend of the good, nor the evil of
the good, nor the good of the evil;-these alternatives are excluded by
the previous argument; and therefore, if there be such a thing as
friendship or love at all, we must infer that what is neither good nor
evil must be the friend, either of the good, or of that which is
neither good nor evil, for nothing can be the friend of the bad.

  True.

  But neither can like be the friend of like, as we were just now
saying.

  True.

  And if so, that which is neither good nor evil can have no friend
which is neither good nor evil.

  Clearly not.

  Then the good alone is the friend of that only which is neither good
nor evil.

  That may be assumed to be certain.

  And does not this seem to put us in the right way? Just remark, that
the body which is in health requires neither medical nor any other
aid, but is well enough; and the healthy man has no love of the
physician, because he is in health.

  He has none.

  But the sick loves him, because he is sick?

  Certainly.

  And sickness is an evil, and the art of medicine a good and useful
thing?

  Yes.

  But the human body, regarded as a body, is neither good nor evil?

  True.

  And the body is compelled by reason of disease to court and make
friends of the art of medicine?

  Yes.

  Then that which is neither good nor evil becomes the friend of good,
by reason of the presence of evil?

  So we may infer.

  And clearly this must have happened before that which was neither
good nor evil had become altogether corrupted with the element of
evil-if itself had become evil it would not still desire and love
the good; for, as we were saying, the evil cannot be the friend of the
good.

  Impossible.

  Further, I must observe that some substances are assimilated when
others are present with them; and there are some which are not
assimilated: take, for example, the case of an ointment or colour
which is put on another substance.

  Very good.

  In such a case, is the substance which is anointed the same as the
colour or ointment?

  What do you mean? he said.

  This is what I mean: Suppose that I were to cover your auburn
locks with white lead, would they be really white, or would they
only appear to be white?

  They would only appear to be white, he replied.

  And yet whiteness would be present in them?

  True.

  But that would not make them at all the more white,
notwithstanding the presence of white in them-they would not be
white any more than black?

  No.

  But when old age infuses whiteness into them, then they become
assimilated, and are white by the presence of white.

  Certainly.

  Now I want to know whether in all cases a substance is assimilated
by the presence of another substance; or must the presence be after
a peculiar sort?

  The latter, he said.

  Then that which is neither good nor evil may be in the presence of
evil, but not as yet evil, and that has happened before now?

  Yes.

  And when anything is in the presence of evil, not being as yet evil,
the presence of good arouses the desire of good in that thing; but the
presence of evil, which makes a thing evil, takes away the desire
and friendship of the good; for that which was once both good and evil
has now become evil only, and the good was supposed to have no
friendship with the evil?

  None.

  And therefore we say that those who are already wise, whether Gods
or men, are no longer lovers of wisdom; nor can they be lovers of
wisdom who are ignorant to the extent of being evil, for no evil or
ignorant person is a lover of wisdom. There remain those who have
the misfortune to be ignorant, but are not yet hardened in their
ignorance, or void of understanding, and do not as yet fancy that they
know what they do not know: and therefore those who are the lovers
of wisdom are as yet neither good nor bad. But the bad do not love
wisdom any more than the good; for, as we have already seen, neither
is unlike the friend of unlike, nor like of like. You remember that?

  Yes, they both said.

  And so, Lysis and Menexenus, we have discovered the nature of
friendship-there can be no doubt of it: Friendship is the love which
by reason of the presence of evil the neither good nor evil has of the
good, either in the soul, or in the body, or anywhere.

  They both agreed and entirely assented, and for a moment I
rejoiced and was satisfied like a huntsman just holding fast his prey.
But then a most unaccountable suspicion came across me, and I felt
that the conclusion was untrue. I was pained, and said, Alas! Lysis
and Menexenus, I am afraid that we have been grasping at a shadow
only.

  Why do you say so? said Menexenus.

  I am afraid, I said, that the argument about friendship is false:
arguments, like men, are often pretenders.

  How do you mean? he asked.

  Well, I said; look at the matter in this way: a friend is the friend
of some one; is he not?

  Certainly he is.

  And has he a motive and object in being a friend, or has he no
motive and object?

  He has a motive and object.

  And is the object which makes him a friend, dear to him, neither
dear nor hateful to him?

  I do not quite follow you, he said.

  I do not wonder at that, I said. But perhaps, if I put the matter in
another way, you will be able to follow me, and my own meaning will be
clearer to myself. The sick man, as I was just now saying, is the
friend of the physician-is he not?

  Yes.

  And he is the friend of the physician because of disease, and for
the sake of health?

  Yes.

  And disease is an evil?

  Certainly.

  And what of health? I said. Is that good or evil, or neither?

  Good, he replied.

  And we were saying, I believe, that the body being neither good
nor evil, because of disease, that is to say because of evil, is the
friend of medicine, and medicine is a good: and medicine has entered
into this friendship for the sake of health, and health is a good.

  True.

  And is health a friend, or not a friend?

  A friend.

  And disease is an enemy?

  Yes.

  Then that which is neither good nor evil is the friend of the good
because of the evil and hateful, and for the sake of the good and
the friend?

  Clearly.

  Then the friend is a friend for the sake of the friend, and
because of the enemy?

  That is to be inferred.

  Then at this point, my boys, let us take heed, and be on our guard
against deceptions. I will not again repeat that the friend is the
friend of the friend, and the like of the like, which has been
declared by us to be an impossibility; but, in order that this new
statement may not delude us, let us attentively examine another point,
which I will proceed to explain: Medicine, as we were saying, is a
friend, dear to us for the sake of health?

  Yes.

  And health is also dear?

  Certainly.

  And if dear, then dear for the sake of something?

  Yes.

  And surely this object must also be dear, as is implied in our
previous admissions?

  Yes.

  And that something dear involves something else dear?

  Yes.

  But then, proceeding in this way, shall we not arrive at some
first principle of friendship or dearness which is not capable of
being referred to any other, for the sake of which, as we maintain,
all other things are dear, and, having there arrived, we shall stop?

  True.

  My fear is that all those other things, which, as we say, are dear
for the sake of another, are illusions and deceptions only, but
where that first principle is, there is the true ideal of
friendship. Let me put the matter thus: Suppose the case of a great
treasure (this may be a son, who is more precious to his father than
all his other treasures); would not the father, who values his son
above all things, value other things also for the sake of his son? I
mean, for instance, if he knew that his son had drunk hemlock, and the
father thought that wine would save him, he would value the wine?

  He would.

  And also the vessel which contains the wine?

  Certainly.

  But does he therefore value the three measures of wine, or the
earthen vessel which contains them, equally with his son? Is not
this rather the true state of the case? All his anxiety has regard not
to the means which are provided for the sake of an object, but to
the object for the sake of which they are provided. And although we
may often say that gold and silver are highly valued by us, that is
not the truth; for there is a further object, whatever it may be,
which we value most of all, and for the sake of which gold and all out
other possessions are acquired by us. Am I not right?

  Yes, certainly.

  And may not the same be said of the friend? That which is only
dear to us for the sake of something else is improperly said to be
dear, but the truly dear is that in which all these so called dear
friendships terminate.

  That, he said, appears to be true.

  And the truly dear or ultimate principle of friendship is not for
the sake of any other or further dear.

  True.

  Then we have done with the notion that friendship has any further
object. May we then infer that the good is the friend?

  I think so.

  And the good is loved for the sake of the evil? Let me put the
case in this way: Suppose that of the three principles, good, evil,
and that which is neither good nor evil, there remained only the
good and the neutral, and that evil went far away, and in no way
affected soul or body, nor ever at all that class of things which,
as we say, are neither good nor evil in themselves;-would the good
be of any use, or other than useless to us? For if there were
nothing to hurt us any longer, we should have no need of anything that
would do us good. Then would be clearly seen that we did but love
and desire the good because of the evil, and as the remedy of the
evil, which was the disease; but if there had been no disease, there
would have been no need of a remedy. Is not this the nature of the
good-to be loved by us who are placed between the two, because of
the evil? but there is no use in the good for its own sake.

  I suppose not.

  Then the final principle of friendship, in which all other
friendships terminated, those, I mean, which are relatively dear and
for the sake of something else, is of another and a different nature
from them. For they are called dear because of another dear or friend.
But with the true friend or dear, the case is quite the reverse; for
that is proved to be dear because of the hated, and if the hated
were away it would be no longer dear.

  Very true, he replied: at any rate not if our present view holds
good.

  But, oh! will you tell me, I said, whether if evil were to perish,
we should hunger any more, or thirst any more, or have any similar
desire? Or may we suppose that hunger will remain while men and
animals remain, but not so as to be hurtful? And the same of thirst
and the other desires,-that they will remain, but will not be evil
because evil has perished? Or rather shall I say, that to ask what
either will be then or will not be is ridiculous, for who knows?
This we do know, that in our present condition hunger may injure us,
and may also benefit us:-Is not that true?

  Yes.

  And in like manner thirst or any similar desire may sometimes be a
good and sometimes an evil to us, and sometimes neither one nor the
other?

  To be sure.

  But is there any reason why, because evil perishes, that which is
not evil should perish with it?

  None.

  Then, even if evil perishes, the desires which are neither good
nor evil will remain?

  Clearly they will.

  And must not a man love that which he desires and affects?

  He must.

  Then, even if evil perishes, there may still remain some elements of
love or friendship?

  Yes.

  But not if evil is the cause of friendship: for in that case nothing
will be the friend of any other thing after the destruction of evil;
for the effect cannot remain when the cause is destroyed.

  True.

  And have we not admitted already that the friend loves something for
a reason? and at the time of making the admission we were of opinion
that the neither good nor evil loves the good because of the evil?

  Very true.

  But now our view is changed, and we conceive that there must be some
other cause of friendship?

  I suppose so.

  May not the truth be rather, as we were saying just now, that desire
is the cause of friendship; for that which desires is dear to that
which is desired at the time of desiring it? and may not the other
theory have been only a long story about nothing?

  Likely enough.

  But surely, I said, he who desires, desires that of which he is in
want?

  Yes.

  And that of which he is in want is dear to him?

  True.

  And he is in want of that of which he is deprived?

  Certainly.

  Then love, and desire, and friendship would appear to be of the
natural or congenial. Such, Lysis and Menexenus, is the inference.

  They assented.

  Then if you are friends, you must have natures which are congenial
to one another?

  Certainly, they both said.

  And I say, my boys, that no one who loves or desires another would
ever have loved or desired or affected him, if he had not been in some
way congenial to him, either in his soul, or in his character, or in
his manners, or in his form.

  Yes, yes, said Menexenus. But Lysis was silent.

  Then, I said, the conclusion is, that what is of a congenial
nature must be loved.

  It follows, he said.

  Then the lover, who is true and no counterfeit, must of necessity be
loved by his love.

  Lysis and Menexenus gave a faint assent to this; and Hippothales
changed into all manner of colours with delight.

  Here, intending to revise the argument, I said: Can we point out any
difference between the congenial and the like? For if that is
possible, then I think, Lysis and Menexenus, there may be some sense
in our argument about friendship. But if the congenial is only the
like, how will you get rid of the other argument, of the uselessness
of like to like in as far as they are like; for to say that what is
useless is dear, would be absurd? Suppose, then, that we agree to
distinguish between the congenial and the like-in the intoxication
of argument, that may perhaps be allowed.

  Very true.

  And shall we further say that the good is congenial, and the evil
uncongenial to every one? Or again that the evil is congenial to the
evil, and the good to the good; and that which is neither good nor
evil to that which is neither good nor evil?

  They agreed to the latter alternative.

  Then, my boys, we have again fallen into the old discarded error;
for the unjust will be the friend of the unjust, and the bad of the
bad, as well as the good of the good.

  That appears to be the result.

  But again, if we say that the congenial is the same as the good,
in that case the good and he only will be the friend of the good.

  True.

  But that too was a position of ours which, as you will remember, has
been already refuted by ourselves.

  We remember.

  Then what is to be done? Or rather is there anything to be done? I
can only, like the wise men who argue in courts, sum up the
arguments:-If neither the beloved, nor the lover, nor the like, nor
the unlike, nor the good, nor the congenial, nor any other of whom
we spoke-for there were such a number of them that I cannot remember
all-if none of these are friends, I know not what remains to be said.

  Here I was going to invite the opinion of some older person, when
suddenly we were interrupted by the tutors of Lysis and Menexenus, who
came upon us like an evil apparition with their brothers, and bade
them go home, as it was getting late. At first, we and the
bystanders drove them off; but afterwards, as they would not mind, and
only went on shouting in their barbarous dialect, and got angry, and
kept calling the boys-they appeared to us to have been drinking rather
too much at the Hermaea, which made them difficult to manage we fairly
gave way and broke up the company.

  I said, however, a few words to the boys at parting: O Menexenus and
Lysis, how ridiculous that you two boys, and I, an old boy, who
would fain be one of you, should imagine ourselves to be
friends-this is what the by-standers will go away and say-and as yet
we have not been able to discover what is a friend!

                            -THE END-
.
                                     380 BC

                                   EUTHYDEMUS

                                    by Plato

                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
EUTHYDEMUS

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES, who is the narrator; CRITO;
CLEINIAS; EUTHYDEMUS; DIONYSODORUS; CTESIPPUS. Scene: The Lyceum

  Crito. Who was the person, Socrates, with whom you were talking
yesterday at the Lyceum? There was such a crowd around you that I
could not get within hearing, but I caught a sight of him over their
heads, and I made out, as I thought, that he was a stranger with
whom you were talking: who was he?

  Socrates. There were two, Crito; which of them do you mean?

  Cri. The one whom I mean was seated second from you on the
right-hand side. In the middle was Cleinias the young son of Axiochus,
who has wonderfully grown; he is only about the age of my own
Critobulus, but he is much forwarder and very good-looking: the
other is thin and looks younger than he is.

  Soc. He whom you mean, Crito, is Euthydemus; and on my left hand
there was his brother Dionysodorus, who also took part in the
conversation.

  Cri. Neither of them are known to me, Socrates; they are a new
importation of Sophists, as I should imagine. Of what country are
they, and what is their line of wisdom?

  Soc. As to their origin, I believe that they are natives of this
part of the world, and have migrated from Chios to Thurii; they were
driven out of Thurii, and have been living for many years past in
these regions. As to their wisdom, about which you ask, Crito, they
are wonderful-consummate! I never knew what the true pancratiast was
before; they are simply made up of fighting, not like the two
Acarnanian brothers who fight with their bodies only, but this pair of
heroes, besides being perfect in the use of their bodies, are
invincible in every sort of warfare; for they are capital at
fighting in armour, and will teach the art to any one who pays them;
and also they are most skilful in legal warfare; they will plead
themselves and teach others to speak and to compose speeches which
will have an effect upon the courts. And this was only the beginning
of their wisdom, but they have at last carried out the pancratiastic
art to the very end, and have mastered the only mode of fighting which
had been hitherto neglected by them; and now no one dares even to
stand up against them: such is their skill in the war of words, that
they can refute any proposition whether true or false. Now I am
thinking, Crito, of placing myself in their hands; for they say that
in a short time they can impart their skill to any one.

  Cri. But, Socrates, are you not too old? there may be reason to fear
that.

  Soc. Certainly not, Crito; as I will prove to you, for I have the
consolation of knowing that they began this art of disputation which I
covet, quite, as I may say, in old age; last year, or the year before,
they had none of their new wisdom. I am only apprehensive that I may
bring the two strangers into disrepute, as I have done Connus the
son of Metrobius, the harp-player, who is still my music-master; for
when the boys who go to him see me going with them, they laugh at me
and call him grandpapa's master. Now I should not like the strangers
to experience similar treatment; the fear of ridicule may make them
unwilling to receive me; and therefore, Crito, I shall try and
persuade some old men to accompany me to them, as I persuaded them
to go with me to Connus, and I hope that you will make one: and
perhaps we had better take your sons as a bait; they will want to have
them as pupils, and for the sake of them willing to receive us.

  Cri. I see no objection, Socrates, if you like; but first I wish
that you would give me a description of their wisdom, that I may
know beforehand what we are going to learn.

  Soc. In less than no time you shall hear; for I cannot say that I
did not attend-I paid great attention to them, and I remember and will
endeavour to repeat the whole story. Providentially I was sitting
alone in the dressing-room of the Lyceum where you saw me, and was
about to depart; when I was getting up I recognized the familiar
divine sign: so I sat down again, and in a little while the two
brothers Euthydemus and Dionysodorus came in, and several others
with them, whom I believe to be their disciples, and they walked about
in the covered court; they had not taken more than two or three
turns when Cleinias entered, who, as you truly say, is very much
improved: he was followed by a host of lovers, one of whom was
Ctesippus the Paeanian, a well-bred youth, but also having the
wildness of youth. Cleinias saw me from the entrance as I was
sitting alone, and at once came and sat down on the right hand of
me, as you describe; and Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, when they saw
him, at first stopped and talked with one another, now and then
glancing at us, for I particularly watched them; and then Euthydemus
came and sat down by the youth, and the other by me on the left
hand; the rest anywhere. I saluted the brothers, whom I had not seen
for a long time; and then I said to Cleinias: Here are two wise men,
Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, Cleinias, wise not in a small but in a
large way of wisdom, for they know all about war,-all that a good
general ought to know about the array and command of an army, and
the whole art of fighting in armour: and they know about law too,
and can teach a man how to use the weapons of the courts when he is
injured.

  They heard me say this, but only despised me. I observed that they
looked at one another, and both of them laughed; and then Euthydemus
Those, Socrates, are matters which we no longer pursue seriously; to
us they are secondary occupations.

  Indeed, I said, if such occupations are regarded by you as
secondary, what must the principal one be; tell me, I beseech you,
what that noble study is?

  The teaching of virtue, Socrates, he replied, is our principal
occupation; and we believe that we can impart it better and quicker
than any man.

  My God! I said, and where did you learn that? I always thought, as I
was saying just now, that your chief accomplishment was the art of
fighting in armour; and I used to say as much of you, for I remember
that you professed this when you were here before. But now if you
really have the other knowledge, O forgive me: I address you as I
would superior beings, and ask you to pardon the impiety of my
former expressions. But are you quite sure about this, Dionysodorus
and Euthydemus? the promise is so vast, that a feeling of
incredulity steals over me.

  You may take our word, Socrates, for the fact.

  Then I think you happier in having such a treasure than the great
king is in the possession of his kingdom. And please to tell me
whether you intend to exhibit your wisdom; or what will you do?

  That is why we have come hither, Socrates; and our purpose is not
only to exhibit, but also to teach any one who likes to learn.

  But I can promise you, I said, that every unvirtuous person will
want to learn. I shall be the first; and there is the youth
Cleinias, and Ctesippus: and here are several others, I said, pointing
to the lovers of Cleinias, who were beginning to gather round us.
Now Ctesippus was sitting at some distance from Cleinias; and when
Euthydemus leaned forward in talking with me, he was prevented from
seeing Cleinias, who was between us; and so, partly because he
wanted to look at his love, and also because he was interested, he
jumped up and stood opposite to us: and all the other admirers of
Cleinias, as well as the disciples of Euthydemus and Dionysodorus,
followed his example. And these were the persons whom I showed to
Euthydemus, telling him that they were all eager to learn: to which
Ctesippus and all of them with one voice vehemently assented, and
bid him exhibit the power of his wisdom. Then I said: O Euthydemus and
Dionysodorus, I earnestly request you to do myself and the company the
favour to exhibit. There may be some trouble in giving the whole
exhibition; but tell me one thing,-can you make a good man of him only
who is already convinced that he ought to learn of you, or of him also
who is not convinced, either because he imagines that virtue is a
thing which cannot be taught at all, or that you are not the
teachers of it? Has your art power to persuade him, who is of the
latter temper of mind, that virtue can be taught; and that you are the
men from whom he will best learn it?

  Certainly, Socrates, said Dionysodorus; our art will do both.

  And you and your brother, Dionysodorus, I said, of all men who are
now living are the most likely to stimulate him to philosophy and to
the study of virtue?

  Yes, Socrates, I rather think that we are.

  Then I wish that you would be so good as to defer the other part
of the exhibition, and only try to persuade the youth whom you see
here that he ought to be a philosopher and study virtue. Exhibit that,
and you will confer a great favour on me and on every one present; for
the fact is I and all of us are extremely anxious that he should
become truly good. His name is Cleinias, and he is the son of
Axiochus, and grandson of the old Alcibiades, cousin of the Alcibiades
that now is. He is quite young, and we are naturally afraid that
some one may get the start of us, and turn his mind in a wrong
direction, and he may be ruined. Your visit, therefore, is most
happily timed; and I hope that you will make a trial of the young man,
and converse with him in our presence, if you have no objection.

  These were pretty nearly the expressions which I used; and
Euthydemus, in a manly and at the same time encouraging tone, replied:
There can be no objection, Socrates, if the young man is only
willing to answer questions.

  He is quite accustomed to do so, I replied; for his friends often
come and ask him questions and argue with him; and therefore he is
quite at home in answering.

  What followed, Crito, how can I rightly narrate? For not slight is
the task of rehearsing infinite wisdom, and therefore, like the poets,
I ought to commence my relation with an invocation to Memory and the
Muses. Now Euthydemus, if I remember rightly, began nearly as follows:
O Cleinias, are those who learn the wise or the ignorant?

  The youth, overpowered by the question blushed, and in his
perplexity looked at me for help; and I, knowing that he was
disconcerted, said: Take courage, Cleinias, and answer like a man
whichever you think; for my belief is that you will derive the
greatest benefit from their questions.

  Whichever he answers, said Dionysodorus, leaning forward so as to
catch my ear, his face beaming with laughter, I prophesy that he
will be refuted, Socrates.

  While he was speaking to me, Cleinias gave his answer: and therefore
I had no time to warn him of the predicament in which he was placed,
and he answered that those who learned were the wise.

  Euthydemus proceeded: There are some whom you would call teachers,
are there not?

  The boy assented.

  And they are the teachers of those who learn-the grammar-master
and the lyre master used to teach you and other boys; and you were the
learners?

  Yes.

  And when you were learners you did not as yet know the things
which you were learning?

  No, he said.

  And were you wise then?

  No, indeed, he said.

  But if you were not wise you were unlearned?

  Certainly.

  You then, learning what you did not know, were unlearned when you
were learning?

  The youth nodded assent.

  Then the unlearned learn, and not the wise, Cleinias, as you
imagine.

  At these words the followers of Euthydemus, of whom I spoke, like
a chorus at the bidding of their director, laughed and cheered.
Then, before the youth had time to recover his breath, Dionysodorus
cleverly took him in hand, and said: Yes, Cleinias; and when the
grammar master dictated anything to you, were they the wise boys or
the unlearned who learned the dictation?

  The wise, replied Cleinias.

  Then after all the wise are the learners and not the unlearned;
and your last answer to Euthydemus was wrong.

  Then once more the admirers of the two heroes, in an ecstasy at
their wisdom, gave vent to another peal of laughter, while the rest of
us were silent and amazed. Euthydemus, observing this, determined to
persevere with the youth; and in order to heighten the effect went
on asking another similar question, which might be compared to the
double turn of an expert dancer. Do those, said he, who learn, learn
what they know, or what they do not know?

  Again Dionysodorus whispered to me: That, Socrates, is just
another of the same sort.

  Good heavens, I said; and your last question was so good!

  Like all our other questions, Socrates, he replied-inevitable.

  I see the reason, I said, why you are in such reputation among
your disciples.

  Meanwhile Cleinias had answered Euthydemus that those who learned
learn what they do not know; and he put him through a series of
questions the same as before.

  Do you not know letters?

  He assented.

  All letters?

  Yes.

  But when the teacher dictates to you, does he not dictate letters?

  To this also he assented.

  Then if you know all letters, he dictates that which you know?

  This again was admitted by him.

  Then, said the other, you do not learn that which he dictates; but
he only who does not know letters learns?

  Nay, said Cleinias; but I do learn.

  Then, said he, you learn what you know, if you know all the letters?

  He admitted that.

  Then, he said, you were wrong in your answer.

  The word was hardly out of his mouth when Dionysodorus took up the
argument, like a ball which he caught, and had another throw at the
youth. Cleinias, he said, Euthydemus is deceiving you. For tell me
now, is not learning acquiring knowledge of that which one learns?

  Cleinias assented.

  And knowing is having knowledge at the time?

  He agreed.

  And not knowing is not having knowledge at the time?

  He admitted that.

  And are those who acquire those who have or have not a thing?

  Those who have not.

  And have you not admitted that those who do not know are of the
number of those who have not?

  He nodded assent.

  Then those who learn are of the class of those who acquire, and
not of those who have?

  He agreed.

  Then, Cleinias, he said, those who do not know learn, and not
those who know.

  Euthydemus was proceeding to give the youth a third fall; but I knew
that he was in deep water, and therefore, as I wanted to give him a
respite lest he should be disheartened, I said to him consolingly: You
must not be surprised, Cleinias, at the singularity of their mode of
speech: this I say because you may not understand what the two
strangers are doing with you; they are only initiating you after the
manner of the Corybantes in the mysteries; and this answers to the
enthronement, which, if you have ever been initiated, is, as you
will know, accompanied by dancing and sport; and now they are just
prancing and dancing about you, and will next proceed to initiate you;
imagine then that you have gone through the first part of the
sophistical ritual, which, as Prodicus says, begins with initiation
into the correct use of terms. The two foreign gentlemen, perceiving
that you did not know, wanted to explain to you that the word "to
learn" has two meanings, and is used, first, in the sense of acquiring
knowledge of some matter of which you previously have no knowledge,
and also, when you have the knowledge, in the sense of reviewing
this matter, whether something done or spoken by the light of this
newly-acquired knowledge; the latter is generally called "knowing"
rather than "learning," but the word "learning" is also used; and
you did not see, as they explained to you, that the term is employed
of two opposite sorts of men, of those who know, and of those who do
not know. There was a similar trick in the second question, when
they asked you whether men learn what they know or what they do not
know. These parts of learning are not serious, and therefore I say
that the gentlemen are not serious, but are only playing with you. For
if a man had all that sort of knowledge that ever was, he would not be
at all the wiser; he would only be able to play with men, tripping
them up and over setting them with distinctions of words. He would
be like a person who pulls away a stool from some one when he is about
to sit down, and then laughs and makes merry at the sight of his
friend overturned and laid on his back. And you must regard all that
has hitherto passed between you and them as merely play. But in what
is to follow I am certain that they will exhibit to you their
serious purpose, and keep their promise (I will show them how); for
they promised to give me a sample of the hortatory philosophy, but I
suppose that they wanted to have a game with you first. And now,
Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, I think that we have had enough of
this. Will you let me see you explaining to the young man how he is to
apply himself to the study of virtue and wisdom? And I will first show
you what I conceive to be the nature of the task, and what sort of a
discourse I desire to hear; and if I do this in a very inartistic
and ridiculous manner, do not laugh at me, for I only venture to
improvise before you because I am eager to hear your wisdom: and I
must therefore ask you and your disciples to refrain from laughing.
And now, O son of Axiochus, let me put a question to you: Do not all
men desire happiness? And yet, perhaps, this is one of those
ridiculous questions which I am afraid to ask, and which ought not
to be asked by a sensible man: for what human being is there who
does not desire happiness?

  There is no one, said Cleinias, who does not.

  Well, then, I said, since we all of us desire happiness, how can
we be happy?-that is the next question. Shall we not be happy if we
have many good things? And this, perhaps, is even a more simple
question than the first, for there can be no doubt of the answer.

  He assented.

  And what things do we esteem good? No solemn sage is required to
tell us this, which may be easily answered; for every one will say
that wealth is a good.

  Certainly, he said.

  And are not health and beauty goods, and other personal gifts?

  He agreed.

  Can there be any doubt that good birth, and power, and honours in
one's own land, are goods?

  He assented.

  And what other goods are there? I said. What do you say of
temperance, justice, courage: do you not verily and indeed think,
Cleinias, that we shall be more right in ranking them as goods than in
not ranking them as goods? For a dispute might possibly arise about
this. What then do you say?

  They are goods, said Cleinias.

  Very well, I said; and where in the company shall we find a place
for wisdom-among the goods or not?

  Among the goods.

  And now, I said, think whether we have left out any considerable
goods.

  I do not think that we have, said Cleinias.

  Upon recollection, I said, indeed I am afraid that we have left
out the greatest of them all.

  What is that? he asked.

  Fortune, Cleinias, I replied; which all, even the most foolish,
admit to be the greatest of goods.

  True, he said.

  On second thoughts, I added, how narrowly, O son of Axiochus, have
you and I escaped making a laughing-stock of ourselves to the
strangers.

  Why do you say so?

  Why, because we have already spoken of good-fortune, and are but
repeating ourselves.

  What do you mean?

  I mean that there is something ridiculous in again putting forward
good-fortune, which has a place in the list already, and saying the
same thing twice over.

  He asked what was the meaning of this, and I replied: Surely
wisdom is good-fortune; even a child may know that.

  The simple-minded youth was amazed; and, observing his surprise, I
said to him: Do you not know, Cleinias, that flute-players are most
fortunate and successful in performing on the flute?

  He assented.

  And are not the scribes most fortunate in writing and reading
letters?

  Certainly.

  Amid the dangers of the sea, again, are any more fortunate on the
whole than wise pilots?

  None, certainly.

  And if you were engaged in war, in whose company would you rather
take the risk-in company with a wise general, or with a foolish one?

  With a wise one.

  And if you were ill, whom would you rather have as a companion in
a dangerous illness-a wise physician, or an ignorant one?

  A wise one.

  You think, I said, that to act with a wise man is more fortunate
than to act with an ignorant one?

  He assented.

  Then wisdom always makes men fortunate: for by wisdom no man would
ever err, and therefore he must act rightly and succeed, or his wisdom
would be wisdom no longer.

  We contrived at last, somehow or other, to agree in a general
conclusion, that he who had wisdom had no need of fortune. I then
recalled to his mind the previous state of the question. You remember,
I said, our making the admission that we should be happy and fortunate
if many good things were present with us?

  He assented.

  And should we be happy by reason of the presence of good things,
if they profited us not, or if they profited us?

  If they profited us, he said.

  And would they profit us, if we only had them and did not use
them? For example, if we had a great deal of food and did not eat,
or a great deal of drink and did not drink, should we be profited?

  Certainly not, he said.

  Or would an artisan, who had all the implements necessary for his
work, and did not use them, be any the better for the possession of
them? For example, would a carpenter be any the better for having
all his tools and plenty of wood, if he never worked?

  Certainly not, he said.

  And if a person had wealth and all the goods of which we were just
now speaking, and did not use them, would he be happy because he
possessed them?

  No indeed, Socrates.

  Then, I said, a man who would be happy must not only have the good
things, but he must also use them; there is no advantage in merely
having them?

  True.

  Well, Cleinias, but if you have the use as well as the possession of
good things, is that sufficient to confer happiness?

  Yes, in my opinion.

  And may a person use them either rightly or wrongly?

  He must use them rightly.

  That is quite true, I said. And the wrong use of a thing is far
worse than the non-use; for the one is an evil, and the other is
neither a good nor an evil. You admit that?

  He assented.

  Now in the working and use of wood, is not that which gives the
right use simply the knowledge of the carpenter?

  Nothing else, he said.

  And surely, in the manufacture of vessels, knowledge is that which
gives the right way of making them?

  He agreed.

  And in the use of the goods of which we spoke at first-wealth and
health and beauty, is not knowledge that which directs us to the right
use of them, and regulates our practice about them?

  He assented.

  Then in every possession and every use of a thing, knowledge is that
which gives a man not only good-fortune but success?

  He again assented.

  And tell me, I said, O tell me, what do possessions profit a man, if
he have neither good sense nor wisdom? Would a man be better off,
having and doing many things without wisdom, or a few things with
wisdom? Look at the matter thus: If he did fewer things would he not
make fewer mistakes? if he made fewer mistakes would he not have fewer
misfortunes? and if he had fewer misfortunes would he not be less
miserable?

  Certainly, he said.

  And who would do least-a Poor man or a rich man?

  A poor man.

  A weak man or a strong man?

  A weak man.

  A noble man or a mean man?

  A mean man.

  And a coward would do less than a courageous and temperate man?

  Yes.

  And an indolent man less than an active man?

  He assented.

  And a slow man less than a quick; and one who had dull perceptions
of seeing and hearing less than one who had keen ones?

  All this was mutually allowed by us.

  Then, I said, Cleinias, the sum of the matter appears to be that the
goods of which we spoke before are not to be regarded as goods in
themselves, but the degree of good and evil in them depends on whether
they are or are not under the guidance of knowledge: under the
guidance of ignorance, they are greater evils than their opposites,
inasmuch as they are more able to minister to the evil principle which
rules them; and when under the guidance of wisdom and prudence, they
are greater goods: but in themselves are nothing?

  That, he replied, is obvious.

  What then is the result of what has been said? Is not this the
result-that other things are indifferent, and that wisdom is the
only good, and ignorance the only evil?

  He assented.

  Let us consider a further point, I said: Seeing that all men
desire happiness, and happiness, as has been shown, is gained by a
use, and a right use, of the things of life, and the right use of
them, and good fortune in the use of them, is given by
knowledge,-the inference is that everybody ought by all means to try
and make himself as wise as he can?

  Yes, he said.

  And when a man thinks that he ought to obtain this treasure, far
more than money, from a father or a guardian or a friend or a
suitor, whether citizen or stranger-the eager desire and prayer to
them that they would impart wisdom to you, is not at all
dishonourable, Cleinias; nor is any one to be blamed for doing any
honourable service or ministration to any man, whether a lover or not,
if his aim is to get wisdom. Do you agree? I said.

  Yes, he said, I quite agree, and think that you are right.

  Yes, I said, Cleinias, if only wisdom can be taught, and does not
come to man spontaneously; for this is a point which has still to be
considered, and is not yet agreed upon by you and me-

  But I think, Socrates, that wisdom can be taught, he said.

  Best of men, I said, I am delighted to hear you say so; and I am
also grateful to you for having saved me from a long and tiresome
investigation as to whether wisdom can be taught or not. But now, as
you think that wisdom can be taught, and that wisdom only can make a
man happy and fortunate will you not acknowledge that all of us
ought to love wisdom, and you individually will try to love her?

  Certainly, Socrates, he said; I will do my best.

  I was pleased at hearing this; and I turned to Dionysodorus and
Euthydemus and said: That is an example, clumsy and tedious I admit,
of the sort of exhortations which I would have you give; and I hope
that one of you will set forth what I have been saying in a more
artistic style: or at least take up the enquiry where I left off,
and proceed to show the youth whether he should have all knowledge; or
whether there is one sort of knowledge only which will make him good
and happy, and what that is. For, as I was saying at first, the
improvement of this young man in virtue and wisdom is a matter which
we have very much at heart.

  Thus I spoke, Crito, and was all attention to what was coming. I
wanted to see how they would approach the question, and where they
would start in their exhortation to the young man that he should
practise wisdom and virtue. Dionysodorus, who was the elder, spoke
first. Everybody's eyes were directed towards him, perceiving that
something wonderful might shortly be expected. And certainly they were
not far wrong; for the man, Crito, began a remarkable discourse well
worth hearing, and wonderfully persuasive regarded as an exhortation
to virtue.

  Tell me, he said, Socrates and the rest of you who say that you want
this young man to become wise, are you in jest or in real earnest?

  I was led by this to imagine that they fancied us to have been
jesting when we asked them to converse with the youth, and that this
made them jest and play, and being under this impression, I was the
more decided in saying that we were in profound earnest.
Dionysodorus said:

  Reflect, Socrates; you may have to deny your words.

  I have reflected, I said; and I shall never deny my words.

  Well, said he, and so you say that you wish Cleinias to become wise?

  Undoubtedly.

  And he is not wise as yet?

  At least his modesty will not allow him to say that he is.

  You wish him, he said, to become wise and not, to be ignorant?

  That we do.

  You wish him to be what he is not, and no longer to be what he is?

  I was thrown into consternation at this.

  Taking advantage of my consternation he added: You wish him no
longer to be what he is, which can only mean that you wish him to
perish. Pretty lovers and friends they must be who want their
favourite not to be, or to perish!

  When Ctesippus heard this he got very angry (as a lover well
might) and said: Stranger of Thurii-if politeness would allow me I
should say, A plague upon you! What can make you tell such a lie about
me and the others, which I hardly like to repeat, as that I wish
Cleinias to perish?

  Euthydemus replied: And do you think, Ctesippus, that it is possible
to tell a lie?

  Yes, said Ctesippus; I should be mad to say anything else.

  And in telling a lie, do you tell the thing of which you speak or
not?

  You tell the thing of which you speak.

  And he who tells, tells that thing which he tells, and no other?

  Yes, said Ctesippus.

  And that is a distinct thing apart from other things?

  Certainly.

  And he who says that thing says that which is?

  Yes.

  And he who says that which is, says the truth. And therefore
Dionysodorus, if he says that which is, says the truth of you and no
lie.

  Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but in saying this, he says what is
not.

  Euthydemus answered: And that which is not is not?

  True.

  And that which is not is nowhere?

  Nowhere.

  And can any one do anything about that which has no existence, or do
to Cleinias that which is not and is nowhere?

  I think not, said Ctesippus.

  Well, but do rhetoricians, when they speak in the assembly, do
nothing?

  Nay, he said, they do something.

  And doing is making?

  Yes.

  And speaking is doing and making?

  He agreed.

  Then no one says that which is not, for in saying what is not he
would be doing something; and you have already acknowledged that no
one can do what is not. And therefore, upon your own showing, no one
says what is false; but if Dionysodorus says anything, he says what is
true and what is.

  Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but he speaks of things in a
certain way and manner, and not as they really are.

  Why, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, do you mean to say that any one
speaks of things as they are?

  Yes, he said-all gentlemen and truth-speaking persons.

  And are not good things good, and evil things evil?

  He assented.

  And you say that gentlemen speak of things as they are?

  Yes.

  Then the good speak evil of evil things, if they speak of them as
they are?

  Yes, indeed, he said; and they speak evil of evil men. And if I
may give you a piece of advice, you had better take care that they
do not speak evil of you, since I can tell you that the good speak
evil of the evil.

  And do they speak great things of the great, rejoined Euthydemus,
and warm things of the warm?

  To be sure they do, said Ctesippus; and they speak coldly of the
insipid and cold dialectician.

  You are abusive, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, you are abusive!

  Indeed, I am not, Dionysodorus, he replied; for I love you and am
giving you friendly advice, and, if I could, would persuade you not
like a boor to say in my presence that I desire my beloved, whom I
value above all men, to perish.

  I saw that they were getting exasperated with one another, so I made
a joke with him and said: O Ctesippus, I think that we must allow
the strangers to use language in their own way, and not quarrel with
them about words, but be thankful for what they give us. If they
know how to destroy men in such a way as to make good and sensible men
out of bad and foolish ones-whether this is a discovery of their
own, or whether they have learned from some one else this new sort
of death and destruction which enables them to get rid of a bad man
and turn him into a good one-if they know this (and they do know
this-at any rate they said just now that this was the secret of
their newly-discovered art)-let them, in their phraseology, destroy
the youth and make him wise, and all of us with him. But if you
young men do not like to trust yourselves with them, then fiat
experimentum in corpore senis; I will be the Carian on whom they shall
operate. And here I offer my old person to Dionysodorus; he may put me
into the pot, like Medea the Colchian, kill me, boil me, if he will
only make me good.

  Ctesippus said: And I, Socrates, am ready to commit myself to the
strangers; they may skin me alive, if they please (and I am pretty
well skinned by them already), if only my skin is made at last, not
like that of Marsyas, into a leathern bottle, but into a piece of
virtue. And here is Dionysodorus fancying that I am angry with him,
when really I am not angry at all; I do but contradict him when I
think that he is speaking improperly to me: and you must not
confound abuse and contradiction, O illustrious Dionysodorus; for they
are quite different things.

  Contradiction! said Dionysodorus; why, there never was such a thing.

  Certainly there is, he replied; there can be no question of that. Do
you, Dionysodorus, maintain that there is not?

  You will never prove to me, he said, that you have heard any one
contradicting any one else.

  Indeed, said Ctesippus; then now you may hear me contradicting
Dionysodorus.

  Are you prepared to make that good?

  Certainly, he said.

  Well, have not all things words expressive of them?

  Yes.

  Of their existence or of their non-existence?

  Of their existence.

  Yes, Ctesippus, and we just now proved, as you may remember, that no
man could affirm a negative; for no one could affirm that which is
not.

  And what does that signify? said Ctesippus; you and I may contradict
all the same for that.

  But can we contradict one another, said Dionysodorus, when both of
us are describing the same thing? Then we must surely be speaking
the same thing?

  He assented.

  Or when neither of us is speaking of the same thing? For then
neither of us says a word about the thing at all?

  He granted that proposition also.

  But when I describe something and you describe another thing, or I
say something and you say nothing-is there any contradiction? How
can he who speaks contradict him who speaks not?

  Here Ctesippus was silent; and I in my astonishment said: What do
you mean, Dionysodorus? I have often heard, and have been amazed to
hear, this thesis of yours, which is maintained and employed by the
disciples of Protagoras, and others before them, and which to me
appears to be quite wonderful, and suicidal as well as destructive,
and I think that I am most likely to hear the truth about it from you.
The dictum is that there is no such thing as falsehood; a man must
either say what is true or say nothing. Is not that your position?

  He assented.

  But if he cannot speak falsely, may he not think falsely?

  No, he cannot, he said.

  Then there is no such thing as false opinion?

  No, he said.

  Then there is no such thing as ignorance, or men who are ignorant;
for is not ignorance, if there be such a thing, a mistake of fact?

  Certainly, he said.

  And that is impossible?

  Impossible, he replied.

  Are you saying this as a paradox, Dionysodorus; or do you
seriously maintain no man to be ignorant?

  Refute me, he said.

  But how can I refute you, if, as you say, to tell a falsehood is
impossible?

  Very true, said Euthydemus.

  Neither did I tell you just now to refute me, said Dionysodorus; for
how can I tell you to do that which is not?

  O Euthydemus, I said, I have but a dull conception of these
subtleties and excellent devices of wisdom; I am afraid that I
hardly understand them, and you must forgive me therefore if I ask a
very stupid question: if there be no falsehood or false opinion or
ignorance, there can be no such thing as erroneous action, for a man
cannot fail of acting as he is acting-that is what you mean?

  Yes, he replied.

  And now, I said, I will ask my stupid question: If there is no
such thing as error in deed, word, or thought, then what, in the
name of goodness, do you come hither to teach? And were you not just
now saying that you could teach virtue best of all men, to any one who
was willing to learn?

  And are you such an old fool, Socrates, rejoined Dionysodorus,
that you bring up now what I said at first-and if I had said
anything last year, I suppose that you would bring that up too-but are
non-plussed at the words which I have just uttered?

  Why, I said, they are not easy to answer; for they are the words
of wise men: and indeed I know not what to make of this word
"nonplussed," which you used last: what do you mean by it,
Dionysodorus? You must mean that I cannot refute your argument. Tell
me if the words have any other sense.

  No, he replied, they mean what you say. And now answer.

  What, before you, Dionysodorus? I said.

  Answer, said he.

  And is that fair?

  Yes, quite fair, he said.

  Upon what principle? I said. I can only suppose that you are a
very wise man who comes to us in the character of a great logician,
and who knows when to answer and when not to answer-and now you will
not open your mouth at all, because you know that you ought not.

  You prate, he said, instead of answering. But if, my good sir, you
admit that I am wise, answer as I tell you.

  I suppose that I must obey, for you are master. Put the question.

  Are the things which have sense alive or lifeless?

  They are alive.

  And do you know of any word which is alive?

  I cannot say that I do.

  Then why did you ask me what sense my words had?

  Why, because I was stupid and made a mistake. And yet, perhaps, I
was right after all in saying that words have a sense;-what do you
say, wise man? If I was not in error, even you will not refute me, and
all your wisdom will be non-plussed; but if I did fall into error,
then again you are wrong in saying that there is no error,-and this
remark was made by you not quite a year ago. I am inclined to think,
however, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, that this argument lies where it
was and is not very likely to advance: even your skill in the
subtleties of logic, which is really amazing, has not found out the
way of throwing another and not falling yourself, now any more than of
old.

  Ctesippus said: Men of Chios, Thurii, or however and whatever you
call yourselves, I wonder at you, for you seem to have no objection to
talking nonsense.

  Fearing that there would be high words, I again endeavoured to
soothe Ctesippus, and said to him: To you, Ctesippus, I must repeat
what I said before to Cleinias-that you do not understand the ways
of these philosophers from abroad. They are not serious, but, like the
Egyptian wizard, Proteus, they take different forms and deceive us
by their enchantments: and let us, like Menelaus, refuse to let them
go until they show themselves to us in earnest. When they begin to
be in earnest their full beauty will appear: let us then beg and
entreat and beseech them to shine forth. And I think that I had better
once more exhibit the form in which I pray to behold them; it might be
a guide to them. I will go on therefore where I left off, as well as I
can, in the hope that I may touch their hearts and move them to
pity, and that when they see me deeply serious and interested, they
also may be serious. You, Cleinias, I said, shall remind me at what
point we left off. Did we not agree that philosophy should be studied?
and was not that our conclusion?

  Yes, he replied.

  And philosophy is the acquisition of knowledge?

  Yes, he said.

  And what knowledge ought we to acquire? May we not answer with
absolute truth-A knowledge which will do us good?

  Certainly, he said.

  And should we be any the better if we went about having a
knowledge of the places where most gold was hidden in the earth?

  Perhaps we should, he said.

  But have we not already proved, I said, that we should be none the
better off, even if without trouble and digging all the gold which
there is in the earth were ours? And if we knew how to convert
stones into gold, the knowledge would be of no value to us, unless
we also knew how to use the gold? Do you not remember? I said.

  I quite remember, he said.

  Nor would any other knowledge, whether of money-making, or of
medicine, or of any other art which knows only how to make a thing,
and not to use it when made, be of any good to us. Am I not right?

  He agreed.

  And if there were a knowledge which was able to make men immortal,
without giving them the knowledge of the way to use the immortality,
neither would there be any use in that, if we may argue from the
analogy of the previous instances?

  To all this he agreed.

  Then, my dear boy, I said, the knowledge which we want is one that
uses as well as makes?

  True, he said.

  And our desire is not to be skilful lyre-makers, or artists of
that sort-far otherwise; for with them the art which makes is one, and
the art which uses is another. Although they have to do with the same,
they are divided: for the art which makes and the art which plays on
the lyre differ widely from one another. Am I not right?

  He agreed.

  And clearly we do not want the art of the flute-maker; this is
only another of the same sort?

  He assented.

  But suppose, I said, that we were to learn the art of making
speeches-would that be the art which would make us happy?

  I should say no, rejoined Cleinias.

  And why should you say so? I asked.

  I see, he replied, that there are some composers of speeches who
do not know how to use the speeches which they make, just as the
makers of lyres do not know how to use the lyres; and also some who
are of themselves unable to compose speeches, but are able to use
the speeches which the others make for them; and this proves that
the art of making speeches is not the same as the art of using them.

  Yes, I said; and I take your words to be a sufficient proof that the
art of making speeches is not one which will make a man happy. And yet
I did think that the art which we have so long been seeking might be
discovered in that direction; for the composers of speeches,
whenever I meet them, always appear to me to be very extraordinary
men, Cleinias, and their art is lofty and divine, and no wonder. For
their art is a part of the great art of enchantment, and hardly, if at
all, inferior to it: and whereas the art of the enchanter is a mode of
charming snakes and spiders and scorpions, and other monsters and
pests, this art of theirs acts upon dicasts and ecclesiasts and bodies
of men, for the charming and pacifying of them. Do you agree with me?

  Yes, he said, I think that you are quite right.

  Whither then shall we go, I said, and to what art shall we have
recourse?

  I do not see my way, he said.

  But I think that I do, I replied.

  And what is your notion? asked Cleinias.

  I think that the art of the general is above all others the one of
which the possession is most likely to make a man happy.

  I do not think so, he said.

  Why not? I said.

  The art of the general is surely an art of hunting mankind.

  What of that? I said.

  Why, he said, no art of hunting extends beyond hunting and
capturing; and when the prey is taken the huntsman or fisherman cannot
use it; but they hand it over to the cook, and the geometricians and
astronomers and calculators (who all belong to the hunting class,
for they do not make their diagrams, but only find out that which
was previously contained in them)-they, I say, not being able to use
but only to catch their prey, hand over their inventions to the
dialectician to be applied by him, if they have any sense in them.

  Good, I said, fairest and wisest Cleinias. And is this true?

  Certainly, he said; just as a general when he takes a city or a camp
hands over his new acquisition to the statesman, for he does not
know how to use them himself; or as the quail-taker transfers the
quails to the keeper of them. If we are looking for the art which is
to make us blessed, and which is able to use that which it makes or
takes, the art of the general is not the one, and some other must be
found.

  Cri. And do you mean, Socrates, that the youngster said all this?

  Soc. Are you incredulous, Crito?

  Cri. Indeed, I am; for if he did say so, then in my opinion he needs
neither Euthydemus nor any one else to be his instructor.

  Soc. Perhaps I may have forgotten, and Ctesippus was the real
answerer.

  Cri. Ctesippus! nonsense.

  Soc. All I know is that I heard these words, and that they were
not spoken either by Euthydemus or Dionysodorus. I dare say, my good
Crito, that they may have been spoken by some superior person: that
I heard them I am certain.

  Cri. Yes, indeed, Socrates, by some one a good deal superior, as I
should be disposed to think. But did you carry the search any further,
and did you find the art which you were seeking?

  Soc. Find! my dear sir, no indeed. And we cut a poor figure; we were
like children after larks, always on the point of catching the art,
which was always getting away from us. But why should I repeat the
whole story? At last we came to the kingly art, and enquired whether
that gave and caused happiness, and then we got into a labyrinth,
and when we thought we were at the end, came out again at the
beginning, having still to seek as much as ever.

  Cri. How did that happen, Socrates?

  Soc. I will tell you; the kingly art was identified by us with the
political.

  Cri. Well, and what came of that?

  Soc. To this royal or political art all the arts, including the
art of the general, seemed to render up the supremacy, that being
the only one which knew how to use what they produce. Here obviously
was the very art which we were seeking-the art which is the source
of good government, and which may be described, in the language of
Aeschylus, as alone sitting at the helm of the vessel of state,
piloting and governing all things, and utilizing them.

  Cri. And were you not right, Socrates?

  Soc. You shall judge, Crito, if you are willing to hear what
followed; for we resumed the enquiry, and a question of this sort
was asked: Does the kingly art, having this supreme authority, do
anything for us? To be sure, was the answer. And would not you, Crito,
say the same?

  Cri. Yes, I should.

  Soc. And what would you say that the kingly art does? If medicine
were supposed to have supreme authority over the subordinate arts, and
I were to ask you a similar question about that, you would say-it
produces health?

  Cri. I should.

  Soc. And what of your own art of husbandry, supposing that to have
supreme authority over the subject arts-what does that do? Does it not
supply us with the fruits of the earth?

  Cri. Yes.

  Soc. And what does the kingly art do when invested with supreme
power? Perhaps you may not be ready with an answer?

  Cri. Indeed I am not, Socrates.

  Soc. No more were we, Crito. But at any rate you know that if this
is the art which we were seeking, it ought to be useful.

  Cri. Certainly.

  Soc. And surely it ought to do us some good?

  Cri. Certainly, Socrates.

  Soc. And Cleinias and I had arrived at the conclusion that knowledge
of some kind is the only good.

  Cri. Yes, that was what you were saying.

  Soc. All the other results of politics, and they are many, as for
example, wealth, freedom, tranquillity, were neither good nor evil
in themselves; but the political science ought to make us wise, and
impart knowledge to us, if that is the science which is likely to do
us good, and make us happy.

  Cri. Yes; that was the conclusion at which you had arrived,
according to your report of the conversation.

  Soc. And does the kingly art make men wise and good?

  Cri. Why not, Socrates?

  Soc. What, all men, and in every respect? and teach them all the
arts,-carpentering, and cobbling, and the rest of them?

  Cri. I think not, Socrates.

  Soc. But then what is this knowledge, and what are we to do with it?
For it is not the source of any works which are neither good nor evil,
and gives no knowledge, but the knowledge of itself; what then can
it be, and what are we to do with it? Shall we say, Crito, that it
is the knowledge by which we are to make other men good?

  Cri. By all means.

  Soc. And in what will they be good and useful? Shall we repeat
that they will make others good, and that these others will make
others again, without ever determining in what they are to be good;
for we have put aside the results of politics, as they are called.
This is the old, old song over again; and we are just as far as
ever, if not farther, from the knowledge of the art or science of
happiness.

  .Cri. Indeed, Socrates, you do appear to have got into a great
perplexity.

  Soc. Thereupon, Crito, seeing that I was on the point of
shipwreck, I lifted up my voice, and earnestly entreated and called
upon the strangers to save me and the youth from the whirlpool of
the argument; they were our Castor and Pollux, I said, and they should
be serious, and show us in sober earnest what that knowledge was which
would enable us to pass the rest of our lives in happiness.

  Cri. And did Euthydemus show you this knowledge?

  Soc. Yes, indeed; he proceeded in a lofty strain to the following
effect: Would you rather, Socrates, said he, that I should show you
this knowledge about which you have been doubting, or shall I prove
that you already have it?

  What, I said, are you blessed with such a power as this?

  Indeed I am.

  Then I would much rather that you should prove me to have such a
knowledge; at my time of life that will be more agreeable than
having to learn.

  Then tell me, he said, do you know anything?

  Yes, I said, I know many things, but not anything of much
importance.

  That will do, he said: And would you admit that anything is what
it is, and at the same time is not what it is?

  Certainly not.

  And did you not say that you knew something?

  I did.

  If you know, you are knowing.

  Certainly, of the knowledge which I have.

  That makes no difference;-and must you not, if you are knowing, know
all things?

  Certainly not, I said, for there are many other things which I do
not know.

  And if you do not know, you are not knowing.

  Yes, friend, of that which I do not know.

  Still you are not knowing, and you said just now that you were
knowing; and therefore you are and are not at the same time, and in
reference to the same things.

  A pretty clatter, as men say, Euthydemus, this of yours! and will
you explain how I possess that knowledge for which we were seeking? Do
you mean to say that the same thing cannot be and also not be; and
therefore, since I know one thing, that I know all, for I cannot be
knowing and not knowing at the same time, and if I know all things,
then I must have the knowledge for which we are seeking-May I assume
this to be your ingenious notion?

  Out of your own mouth, Socrates, you are convicted, he said.

  Well, but, Euthydemus, I said, has that never happened to you? for
if I am only in the same case with you and our beloved Dionysodorus, I
cannot complain. Tell me, then, you two, do you not know some
things, and not know others?

  Certainly not, Socrates, said Dionysodorus.

  What do you mean, I said; do you know nothing?

  Nay, he replied, we do know something.

  Then, I said, you know all things, if you know anything?

  Yes, all things, he said; and that is as true of you as of us.

  O, indeed, I said, what a wonderful thing, and what a great
blessing! And do all other men know all things or nothing?

  Certainly, he replied; they cannot know some things, and not know
others, and be at the same time knowing and not knowing.

  Then what is the inference? I said.

  They all know all things, he replied, if they know one thing.

  O heavens, Dionysodorus, I said, I see now that you are in
earnest; hardly have I got you to that point. And do you really and
truly know all things, including carpentering and leather cutting?

  Certainly, he said.

  And do you know stitching?

  Yes, by the gods, we do, and cobbling, too.

  And do you know things such as the numbers of the stars and of the
sand?

  Certainly; did you think we should say no to that?

  By Zeus, said Ctesippus, interrupting, I only wish that you would
give me some proof which would enable me to know whether you speak
truly.

  What proof shall I give you? he said.

  Will you tell me how many teeth Euthydemus has? and Euthydemus shall
tell how many teeth you have.

  Will you not take our word that we know all things?

  Certainly not, said Ctesippus: you must further tell us this one
thing, and then we shall know that you are speak the truth; if you
tell us the number, and we count them, and you are found to be
right, we will believe the rest. They fancied that Ctesippus was
making game of them, and they refused, and they would only say in
answer to each of his questions, that they knew all things. For at
last Ctesippus began to throw off all restraint; no question in fact
was too bad for him; he would ask them if they knew the foulest
things, and they, like wild boars, came rushing on his blows, and
fearlessly replied that they did. At last, Crito, I too was carried
away by my incredulity, and asked Euthydemus whether Dionysodorus
could dance.

  Certainly, he replied.

  And can he vault among swords, and turn upon a wheel, at his age?
has he got to such a height of skill as that?

  He can do anything, he said.

  And did you always know this?

  Always, he said.

  When you were children, and at your birth?

  They both said that they did.

  This we could not believe. And Euthydemus said: You are incredulous,
Socrates.

  Yes, I said, and I might well be incredulous, if I did not know
you to be wise men.

  But if you will answer, he said, I will make you confess to
similar marvels.

  Well, I said, there is nothing that I should like better than to
be self-convicted of this, for if I am really a wise man, which I
never knew before, and you will prove to me that I know and have
always known all things, nothing in life would be a greater gain to
me.

  Answer then, he said.

  Ask, I said, and I will answer.

  Do you know something, Socrates, or nothing?

  Something, I said.

  And do you know with what you know, or with something else?

  With what I know; and I suppose that you mean with my soul?

  Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of asking a question when you are
asked one?

  Well, I said; but then what am I to do? for I will do whatever you
bid; when I do not know what you are asking, you tell me to answer
nevertheless, and not to ask again.

  Why, you surely have some notion of my meaning, he said.

  Yes, I replied.

  Well, then, answer according to your notion of my meaning.

  Yes, I said; but if the question which you ask in one sense is
understood and answered by me in another, will that please you-if I
answer what is not to the point?

  That will please me very well; but will not please you equally well,
as I imagine.

  I certainly will not answer unless I understand you, I said.

  You will not answer, he said, according to your view of the meaning,
because you will be prating, and are an ancient.

  Now I saw that he was getting angry with me for drawing
distinctions, when he wanted to catch me in his springes of words. And
I remembered that Connus was always angry with me when I opposed
him, and then he neglected me, because he thought that I was stupid;
and as I was intending to go to Euthydemus as a pupil, I reflected
that I had better let him have his way, as he might think me a
blockhead, and refuse to take me. So I said: You are a far better
dialectician than myself, Euthydemus, for I have never made a
profession of the art, and therefore do as you say; ask your questions
once more, and I will answer.

  Answer then, he said, again, whether you know what you know with
something, or with nothing.

  Yes, I said; I know with my soul.

  The man will answer more than the question; for I did not ask you,
he said, with what you know, but whether you know with something.

  Again I replied, Through ignorance I have answered too much, but I
hope that you will forgive me. And now I will answer simply that I
always know what I know with something.

  And is that something, he rejoined, always the same, or sometimes
one thing, and sometimes another thing?

  Always, I replied, when I know, I know with this.

  Will you not cease adding to your answers?

  My fear is that this word "always" may get us into trouble.

  You, perhaps, but certainly not us. And now answer: Do you always
know with this?

  Always; since I am required to withdraw the words "when I know."

  You always know with this, or, always knowing, do you know some
things with this, and some things with something else, or do you
know all things with this?

  All that I know, I replied, I know with this.

  There again, Socrates, he said, the addition is superfluous.

  Well, then, I said, I will take away the words that I know."

  Nay, take nothing away; I desire no favours of you; but let me
ask: Would you be able to know all things, if you did not know all
things?

  Quite impossible.

  And now, he said, you may add on whatever you like, for you
confess that you know all things.

  I suppose that is true, I said, if my qualification implied in the
words "that I know" is not allowed to stand; and so I do know all
things.

  And have you not admitted that you always know all things with
that which you know, whether you make the addition of "when you know
them" or not? for you have acknowledged that you have always and at
once known all things, that is to say, when you were a child, and at
your birth, and when you were growing up, and before you were born,
and before the heaven and earth existed, you knew all things if you
always know them; and I swear that you shall always continue to know
all things, if I am of the mind to make you.

  But I hope that you will be of that mind, reverend Euthydemus, I
said, if you are really speaking the truth, and yet I a little doubt
your power to make good your words unless you have the help of your
brother Dionysodorus; then you may do it. Tell me now, both of you,
for although in the main I cannot doubt that I really do know all
things, when I am told so by men of your prodigious wisdom-how can I
say that I know such things, Euthydemus, as that the good are
unjust; come, do I know that or not?

  Certainly, you know that.

  What do I know?

  That the good are not unjust.

  Quite true, I said; and that I have always known; but the question
is, where did I learn that the good are unjust?

  Nowhere, said Dionysodorus.

  Then, I said, I do not know this.

  You are ruining the argument, said Euthydemus to Dionysodorus; he
will be proved not to know, and then after all he will be knowing
and not knowing at the same time.

  Dionysodorus blushed.

  I turned to the other, and said, What do you think, Euthydemus? Does
not your omniscient brother appear to you to have made a mistake?

  What, replied Dionysodorus in a moment; am I the brother of
Euthydemus?

  Thereupon I said, Please not to interrupt, my good friend, or
prevent Euthydemus from proving to me that I know the good to be
unjust; such a lesson you might at least allow me to learn.

  You are running away, Socrates, said Dionysodorus, and refusing to
answer.

  No wonder, I said, for I am not a match for one of you, and a
fortiori I must run away from two. I am no Heracles; and even Heracles
could not fight against the Hydra, who was a she-Sophist, and had
the wit to shoot up many new heads when one of them was cut off;
especially when he saw a second monster of a sea-crab, who was also
a Sophist, and appeared to have newly arrived from a sea-voyage,
bearing down upon him from the left, opening his mouth and biting.
When the monster was growing troublesome he called Iolaus, his nephew,
to his help, who ably succoured him; but if my Iolaus, who is my
brother Patrocles [the statuary], were to come, he would only make a
bad business worse.

  And now that you have delivered yourself of this strain, said
Dionysodorus, will you inform me whether Iolaus was the nephew of
Heracles any more than he is yours?

  I suppose that I had best answer you, Dionysodorus, I said, for
you will insist on asking that I pretty well know-out of envy, in
order to prevent me from learning the wisdom of Euthydemus.

  Then answer me, he said.

  Well then, I said, I can only reply that Iolaus was not my nephew at
all, but the nephew of Heracles; and his father was not my brother
Patrocles, but Iphicles, who has a name rather like his, and was the
brother of Heracles.

  And is Patrocles, he said, your brother?

  Yes, I said, he is my half-brother, the son of my mother, but not of
my father.

  Then he is and is not your brother.

  Not by the same father, my good man, I said, for Chaeredemus was his
father, and mine was Sophroniscus.

  And was Sophroniscus a father, and Chaeredemus also?

  Yes, I said; the former was my father, and the latter his.

  Then, he said, Chaeredemus is not a father.

  He is not my father, I said.

  But can a father be other than a father? or are you the same as a
stone?

  I certainly do not think that I am a stone, I said, though I am
afraid that you may prove me to be one.

  Are you not other than a stone?

  I am.

  And being other than a stone, you are not a stone; and being other
than gold, you are not gold?

  Very true.

  And so Chaeredemus, he said, being other than a father, is not a
father?

  I suppose that he is not a father, I replied.

  For if, said Euthydemus, taking up the argument, Chaeredemus is a
father, then Sophroniscus, being other than a father, is not a father;
and you, Socrates, are without a father.

  Ctesippus, here taking up the argument, said: And is not your father
in the same case, for he is other than my father?

  Assuredly not, said Euthydemus.

  Then he is the same?

  He is the same.

  I cannot say that I like the connection; but is he only my father,
Euthydemus, or is he the father of all other men?

  Of all other men, he replied. Do you suppose the same person to be a
father and not a father?

  Certainly, I did so imagine, said Ctesippus.

  And do you suppose that gold is not gold, or that a man is not a
man?

  They are not "in pari materia," Euthydemus, said Ctesippus, and
you had better take care, for it is monstrous to suppose that your
father is the father of all.

  But he is, he replied.

  What, of men only, said Ctesippus, or of horses and of all other
animals?

  Of all, he said.

  And your mother, too, is the mother of all?

  Yes, our mother too.

  Yes; and your mother has a progeny of sea-urchins then?

  Yes; and yours, he said.

  And gudgeons and puppies and pigs are your brothers?

  And yours too.

  And your papa is a dog?

  And so is yours, he said.

  If you will answer my questions, said Dionysodorus, I will soon
extract the same admissions from you, Ctesippus. You say that you have
a dog.

  Yes, a villain of a one, said Ctesippus.

  And he has puppies?

  Yes, and they are very like himself.

  And the dog is the father of them?

  Yes, he said, I certainly saw him and the mother of the puppies come
together.

  And is he not yours?

  To be sure he is.

  Then he is a father, and he is yours; ergo, he is your father, and
the puppies are your brothers.

  Let me ask you one little question more, said Dionysodorus,
quickly interposing, in order that Ctesippus might not get in his
word: You beat this dog?

  Ctesippus said, laughing, Indeed I do; and I only wish that I
could beat you instead of him.

  Then you beat your father, he said.

  I should have far more reason to beat yours, said Ctesippus; what
could he have been thinking of when he begat such wise sons? much good
has this father of you and your brethren the puppies got out of this
wisdom of yours.

  But neither he nor you, Ctesippus, have any need of much good.

  And have you no need, Euthydemus? he said.

  Neither I nor any other man; for tell me now, Ctesippus, if you
think it good or evil for a man who is sick to drink medicine when
he wants it; or to go to war armed rather than unarmed.

  Good, I say. And yet I know that I am going to be caught in one of
your charming puzzles.

  That, he replied, you will discover, if you answer; since you
admit medicine to be good for a man to drink, when wanted, must it not
be good for him to drink as much as possible; when he takes his
medicine, a cartload of hellebore will not be too much for him?

  Ctesippus said: Quite so, Euthydemus, that is to say, if he who
drinks is as big as the statue of Delphi.

  And seeing that in war to have arms is a good thing, he ought to
have as many spears and shields as possible?

  Very true, said Ctesippus; and do you think, Euthydemus, that he
ought to have one shield only, and one spear?

  I do.

  And would you arm Geryon and Briarcus in that way? Considering
that you and your companion fight in armour, I thought that you
would have known better.... Here Euthydemus held his peace, but
Dionysodorus returned to the previous answer of Ctesippus and said:-

  Do you not think that the possession of gold is a good thing?

  Yes, said Ctesippus, and the more the better.

  And to have money everywhere and always is a good?

  Certain a great good, he said.

  And you admit gold to be a good?

  Certainly, he replied.

  And ought not a man then to have gold everywhere and always, and
as much as possible in himself, and may he not be deemed the
happiest of men who has three talents of gold in his belly, and a
talent in his pate, and a stater of gold in either eye?

  Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; and the Scythians reckon those
who have gold in their own skulls to be the happiest and bravest of
men (that is only another instance of your manner of speaking about
the dog and father), and what is still more extraordinary, they
drink out of their own skulls gilt and see the inside of them, and
hold their own head in their hands.

  And do the Scythians and others see that which has the quality of
vision, or that which has not? said Euthydemus.

  That which has the quality of vision clearly.

  And you also see that which has the quality Of vision? he said.

  Yes, I do.

  Then do you see our garments?

  Yes.

  Then our garments have the quality of vision.

  They can see to any extent, said Ctesippus.

  What can they see?

  Nothing; but you, my sweet man, may perhaps imagine that they do not
see; and certainly, Euthydemus, you do seem to me to have been
caught napping when you were not asleep, and that if it be possible to
speak and say nothing-you are doing so.

  And may there not be a silence of the speaker? said Dionysodorus.

  Impossible, said Ctesippus.

  Or a speaking of the silent?

  That is still more impossible, he said.

  But when you speak of stones, wood, iron bars, do you not speak of
the silent?

  Not when I pass a smithy; for then the iron bars make a tremendous
noise and outcry if they are touched: so that here your wisdom is
strangely mistaken, please, however, to tell me how you can be
silent when speaking (I thought that Ctesippus was put upon his mettle
because Cleinias was present).

  When you are silent, said Euthydemus, is there not a silence of
all things?

  Yes, he said.

  But if speaking things are included in all things, then the speaking
are silent.

  What, said Ctesippus; then all things are not silent?

  Certainly not, said Euthydemus.

  Then, my good friend, do they all speak?

  Yes; those which speak.

  Nay, said Ctesippus, but the question which I ask is whether all
things are silent or speak?

  Neither and both, said Dionysodorus, quickly interposing; I am
sure that you will be "nonplussed" at that answer.

  Here Ctesippus, as his manner was, burst into a roar of laughter; he
said, That brother of yours, Euthydemus, has got into a dilemma; all
is over with him. This delighted Cleinias, whose laughter made
Ctesippus ten times as uproarious; but I cannot help thinking that the
rogue must have picked up this answer from them; for there has been no
wisdom like theirs in our time. Why do you laugh, Cleinias, I said, at
such solemn and beautiful things?

  Why, Socrates, said Dionysodorus, did you ever see a beautiful
thing?

  Yes, Dionysodorus, I replied, I have seen many.

  Were they other than the beautiful, or the same as the beautiful?

  Now I was in a great quandary at having to answer this question, and
I thought that I was rightly served for having opened my mouth at all:
I said however, They are not the same as absolute beauty, but they
have beauty present with each of them.

  And are you an ox because an ox is present with you, or are you
Dionysodorus, because Dionysodorus is present with you?

  God forbid, I replied.

  But how, he said, by reason of one thing being present with another,
will one thing be another?

  Is that your difficulty? I said. For I was beginning to imitate
their skill, on which my heart was set.

  Of course, he replied, I and all the world are in a difficulty about
the non-existent.

  What do you mean, Dionysodorus? I said. Is not the honourable
honourable and the base base?

  That, he said, is as I please.

  And do you please?

  Yes, he said.

  And you will admit that the same is the same, and the other other;
for surely the other is not the same; I should imagine that even a
child will hardly deny the other to be other. But I think,
Dionysodorus, that you must have intentionally missed the last
question; for in general you and your brother seem to me to be good
workmen in your own department, and to do the dialectician's
business excellently well.

  What, said he, is the business of a good workman? tell me, in the
first place, whose business is hammering?

  The smith's.

  And whose the making of pots?

  The potter's.

  And who has to kill and skin and mince and boil and roast?

  The cook, I said.

  And if a man does his business he does rightly?

  Certainly.

  And the business of the cook is to cut up and skin; you have
admitted that?

  Yes, I have admitted that, but you must not be too hard upon me.

  Then if some one were to kill, mince, boil, roast the cook, he would
do his business, and if he were to hammer the smith, and make a pot of
the potter, he would do their business.

  Poseidon, I said, this is the crown of wisdom; can I ever hope to
have such wisdom of my own?

  And would you be able, Socrates, to recognize this wisdom when it
has become your own?

  Certainly, I said, if you will allow me.

  What, he said, do you think that you know what is your own?

  Yes, I do, subject to your correction; for you are the bottom, and
Euthydemus is the top, of all my wisdom.

  Is not that which you would deem your own, he said, that which you
have in your own power, and which you are able to use as you would
desire, for example, an ox or a sheep would you not think that which
you could sell and give and sacrifice to any god whom you pleased,
to be your own, and that which you could not give or sell or sacrifice
you would think not to be in your own power?

  Yes, I said (for I was certain that something good would come out of
the questions, which I was impatient to hear); yes, such things, and
such things only are mine.

  Yes, he said, and you would mean by animals living beings?

  Yes, I said.

  You agree then, that-those animals only are yours with which you
have the power to do all these things which I was just naming?

  I agree.

  Then, after a pause, in which he seemed to be lost in the
contemplation of something great, he said: Tell me, Socrates, have you
an ancestral Zeus? Here, anticipating the final move, like a person
caught in a net, who gives a desperate twist that he may get away, I
said: No, Dionysodorus, I have not.

  What a miserable man you must be then, he said; you are not an
Athenian at all if you have no ancestral gods or temples, or any other
mark of gentility.

  Nay, Dionysodorus, I said, do not be rough; good words, if you
please; in the way of religion I have altars and temples, domestic and
ancestral, and all that other Athenians have.

  And have not other Athenians, he said, an ancestral Zeus?

  That name, I said, is not to be found among the Ionians, whether
colonists or citizens of Athens; an ancestral Apollo there is, who
is the father of Ion, and a family Zeus, and a Zeus guardian of the
phratry, and an Athene guardian of the phratry. But the name of
ancestral Zeus is unknown to us.

  No matter, said Dionysodorus, for you admit that you have Apollo,
Zeus, and Athene.

  Certainly, I said.

  And they are your gods, he said.

  Yes, I said, my lords and ancestors.

  At any rate they are yours, he said, did you not admit that?

  I did, I said; what is going to happen to me?

  And are not these gods animals? for you admit that all things
which have life are animals; and have not these gods life?

  They have life, I said.

  Then are they not animals?

  They are animals, I said.

  And you admitted that of animals those are yours which you could
give away or sell or offer in sacrifice, as you pleased?

  I did admit that, Euthydemus, and I have no way of escape.

  Well then, said he, if you admit that Zeus and the other gods are
yours, can you sell them or give them away or do what you will with
them, as you would with other animals?

  At this I was quite struck dumb, Crito, and lay prostrate. Ctesippus
came to the rescue.

  Bravo, Heracles, brave words, said he.

  Bravo Heracles, or is Heracles a Bravo? said Dionysodorus.

  Poseidon, said Ctesippus, what awful distinctions. I will have no
more of them; the pair are invincible.

  Then, my dear Crito, there was universal applause of the speakers
and their words, and what with laughing and clapping of hands and
rejoicings the two men were quite overpowered; for hitherto their
partisans only had cheered at each successive hit, but now the whole
company shouted with delight until the columns of the Lyceum
returned the sound, seeming to sympathize in their joy. To such a
pitch was I affected myself, that I made a speech, in which I
acknowledged that I had never seen the like of their wisdom; I was
their devoted servant, and fell to praising and admiring of them. What
marvellous dexterity of wit, I said, enabled you to acquire this great
perfection in such a short time? There is much, indeed, to admire in
your words, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, but there is nothing that I
admire more than your magnanimous disregard of any opinion-whether
of the many, or of the grave and reverend seigniors-you regard only
those who are like yourselves. And I do verily believe that there
are few who are like you, and who would approve of such arguments; the
majority of mankind are so ignorant of their value, that they would be
more ashamed of employing them in the refutation of others than of
being refuted by them. I must further express my approval of your kind
and public-spirited denial of all differences, whether of good and
evil, white or black, or any other; the result of which is that, as
you say, every mouth is sewn up, not excepting your own, which
graciously follows the example of others; and thus all ground of
offence is taken away. But what appears to me to be more than all
is, that this art and invention of yours has been so admirably
contrived by you, that in a very short time it can be imparted to
any one. I observed that Ctesippus learned to imitate you in no
time. Now this quickness of attainment is an excellent thing; but at
the same time I would advise you not to have any more public
entertainments; there is a danger that men may undervalue an art which
they have so easy an opportunity of acquiring; the exhibition would be
best of all, if the discussion were confined to your two selves; but
if there must be an audience, let him only be present who is willing
to pay a handsome fee;-you should be careful of this;-and if you are
wise, you will also bid your disciples discourse with no man but you
and themselves. For only what is rare is valuable; and "water," which,
as Pindar says, is the "best of all things," is also the cheapest. And
now I have only to request that you will receive Cleinias and me among
your pupils.

  Such was the discussion, Crito; and after a few more words had
passed between us we went away. I hope that you will come to them with
me, since they say that they are able to teach any one who will give
them money; no age or want of capacity is an impediment. And I must
repeat one thing which they said, for your especial benefit,-that
the learning of their art did not at all interfere with the business
of money-making.

  Cri. Truly, Socrates, though I am curious and ready to learn, yet
I fear that I am not like minded with Euthydemus, but one of the other
sort, who, as you were saying, would rather be refuted by such
arguments than use them in refutation of others. And though I may
appear ridiculous in venturing to advise you, I think that you may
as well hear what was said to me by a man of very considerable
pretensions-he was a professor of legal oratory-who came away from you
while I was walking up and down. "Crito," said he to me, "are you
giving no attention to these wise men?" "No, indeed," I said to him;
"I could not get within hearing of them-there was such a crowd."
"You would have heard something worth hearing if you had." "What was
that?" I said. "You would have heard the greatest masters of the art
of rhetoric discoursing." "And what did you think of them?" I said.
"What did I think of them?" he said:-"theirs was the sort of discourse
which anybody might hear from men who were playing the fool, and
making much ado about nothing. "That was the expression which he used.
"Surely," I said, "philosophy is a charming thing." "Charming!" he
said; "what simplicity! philosophy is nought; and I think that if
you had been present you would have been ashamed of your friend-his
conduct was so very strange in placing himself at the mercy of men who
care not what they say, and fasten upon every word. And these, as I
was telling you, are supposed to be the most eminent professors of
their time. But the truth is, Crito, that the study itself and the men
themselves are utterly mean and ridiculous." Now censure of the
pursuit, Socrates, whether coming from him or from others, appears
to me to be undeserved; but as to the impropriety of holding a
public discussion with such men, there, I confess that, in my opinion,
he was in the right.

  Soc. O Crito, they are marvellous men; but what was I going to
say? First of all let me know;-What manner of man was he who came up
to you and censured philosophy; was he an orator who himself practises
in the courts, or an instructor of orators, who makes the speeches
with which they do battle?

  Cri. He was certainly not an orator, and I doubt whether he had ever
been into court; but they say that he knows the business, and is a
clever man, and composes wonderful speeches.

  Soc. Now I understand, Crito; he is one of an amphibious class, whom
I was on the point of mentioning-one of those whom Prodicus
describes as on the border-ground between philosophers and
statesmen-they think that they are the wisest of all men, and that
they are generally esteemed the wisest; nothing but the rivalry of the
philosophers stands in their way; and they are of the opinion that
if they can prove the philosophers to be good for nothing, no one will
dispute their title to the palm of wisdom, for that they are
themselves really the wisest, although they are apt to be mauled by
Euthydemus and his friends, when they get hold of them in
conversation. This opinion which they entertain of their own wisdom is
very natural; for they have a certain amount of philosophy, and a
certain amount of political wisdom; there is reason in what they
say, for they argue that they have just enough of both, and so they
keep out-of the way all risks and conflicts and reap the fruits of
their wisdom.

  Cri. What do you say of them, Socrates? There is certainly something
specious in that notion of theirs.

  Soc. Yes, Crito, there is more speciousness than truth; they
cannot be made to understand the nature of intermediates. For all
persons or things, which are intermediate between two other things,
and participate in both of them-if one of these two things is good and
the other evil, are better than the one and worse than the other;
but if they are in a mean between two good things which do not tend to
the same end, they fall short of either of their component elements in
the attainment of their ends. Only in the case when the two
component elements which do not tend to the same end are evil is the
participant better than either. Now, if philosophy and political
action are both good, but tend to different ends, and they participate
in both, and are in a mean between them, then they are talking
nonsense, for they are worse than either; or, if the one be good and
the other evil, they are better than the one and worse than the other;
only on the supposition that they are both evil could there be any
truth in what they say. I do not think that they will admit that their
two pursuits are either wholly or partly evil; but the truth is,
that these philosopher-politicians who aim at both fall short of
both in the attainment of their respective ends, and are really third,
although they would like to stand first. There is no need, however, to
be angry at this ambition of theirs-which may be forgiven; for every
man ought to be loved who says and manfully pursues and works out
anything which is at all like wisdom: at the same time we shall do
well to see them as they really are.

  Cri. I have often told you, Socrates, that I am in a constant
difficulty about my two sons. What am I to do with them? There is no
hurry about the younger one, who is only a child; but the other,
Critobulus, is getting on, and needs some one who will improve him.
I cannot help thinking, when I hear you talk, that there is a sort
of madness in many of our anxieties about our children:-in the first
place, about marrying a wife of good family to be the mother of
them, and then about heaping up money for them-and yet taking no
care about their education. But then again, when I contemplate any
of those who pretend to educate others, I am amazed. To me, if I am to
confess the truth, they all seem to be such outrageous beings: so that
I do not know how I can advise the youth to study philosophy.

  Soc. Dear Crito, do you not know that in every profession the
inferior sort are numerous and good for nothing, and the good are
few and beyond all price: for example, are not gymnastic and
rhetoric and money-making and the art of the general, noble arts?

  Cri. Certainly they are, in my judgment.

  Soc. Well, and do you not see that in each of these arts the many
are ridiculous performers?

  Cri. Yes, indeed, that is very true.

  Soc. And will you on this account shun all these pursuits yourself
and refuse to allow them to your son?

  Cri. That would not be reasonable, Socrates.

  Soc. Do you then be reasonable, Crito, and do not mind whether the
teachers of philosophy are good or bad, but think only of philosophy
herself. Try and examine her well and truly, and if she be evil seek
to turn away all men from her, and not your sons only; but if she be
what I believe that she is, then follow her and serve her, you and
your house, as the saying is, and be of good cheer.

                           -THE END-
.
                                     360 BC

                               THE SEVENTH LETTER

                                    by Plato

                            translated by J. Harward

  PLATO TO THE RELATIVES AND FRIENDS OF DION. WELFARE.

  You write to me that I must consider your views the same as those of
Dion, and you urge me to aid your cause so far as I can in word and
deed. My answer is that, if you have the same opinion and desire as he
had, I consent to aid your cause; but if not, I shall think more
than once about it. Now what his purpose and desire was, I can
inform you from no mere conjecture but from positive knowledge. For
when I made my first visit to Sicily, being then about forty years
old, Dion was of the same age as Hipparinos is now, and the opinion
which he then formed was that which he always retained, I mean the
belief that the Syracusans ought to be free and governed by the best
laws. So it is no matter for surprise if some God should make
Hipparinos adopt the same opinion as Dion about forms of government.
But it is well worth while that you should all, old as well as
young, hear the way in which this opinion was formed, and I will
attempt to give you an account of it from the beginning. For the
present is a suitable opportunity.

  In my youth I went through the same experience as many other men.
I fancied that if, early in life, I became my own master, I should
at once embark on a political career. And I found myself confronted
with the following occurrences in the public affairs of my own city.
The existing constitution being generally condemned, a revolution took
place, and fifty-one men came to the front as rulers of the
revolutionary government, namely eleven in the city and ten in the
Peiraeus-each of these bodies being in charge of the market and
municipal matters-while thirty were appointed rulers with full
powers over public affairs as a whole. Some of these were relatives
and acquaintances of mine, and they at once invited me to share in
their doings, as something to which I had a claim. The effect on me
was not surprising in the case of a young man. I considered that
they would, of course, so manage the State as to bring men out of a
bad way of life into a good one. So I watched them very closely to see
what they would do.

  And seeing, as I did, that in quite a short time they made the
former government seem by comparison something precious as gold-for
among other things they tried to send a friend of mine, the aged
Socrates, whom I should scarcely scruple to describe as the most
upright man of that day, with some other persons to carry off one of
the citizens by force to execution, in order that, whether he wished
it, or not, he might share the guilt of their conduct; but he would
not obey them, risking all consequences in preference to becoming a
partner in their iniquitous deeds-seeing all these things and others
of the same kind on a considerable scale, I disapproved of their
proceedings, and withdrew from any connection with the abuses of the
time.

  Not long after that a revolution terminated the power of the
thirty and the form of government as it then was. And once more,
though with more hesitation, I began to be moved by the desire to take
part in public and political affairs. Well, even in the new
government, unsettled as it was, events occurred which one would
naturally view with disapproval; and it was not surprising that in a
period of revolution excessive penalties were inflicted by some
persons on political opponents, though those who had returned from
exile at that time showed very considerable forbearance. But once more
it happened that some of those in power brought my friend Socrates,
whom I have mentioned, to trial before a court of law, laying a most
iniquitous charge against him and one most inappropriate in his
case: for it was on a charge of impiety that some of them prosecuted
and others condemned and executed the very man who would not
participate in the iniquitous arrest of one of the friends of the
party then in exile, at the time when they themselves were in exile
and misfortune.

  As I observed these incidents and the men engaged in public affairs,
the laws too and the customs, the more closely I examined them and the
farther I advanced in life, the more difficult it seemed to me to
handle public affairs aright. For it was not possible to be active
in politics without friends and trustworthy supporters; and to find
these ready to my hand was not an easy matter, since public affairs at
Athens were not carried on in accordance with the manners and
practices of our fathers; nor was there any ready method by which I
could make new friends. The laws too, written and unwritten, were
being altered for the worse, and the evil was growing with startling
rapidity. The result was that, though at first I had been full of a
strong impulse towards political life, as I looked at the course of
affairs and saw them being swept in all directions by contending
currents, my head finally began to swim; and, though I did not stop
looking to see if there was any likelihood of improvement in these
symptoms and in the general course of public life, I postponed
action till a suitable opportunity should arise. Finally, it became
clear to me, with regard to all existing cornmunities, that they
were one and all misgoverned. For their laws have got into a state
that is almost incurable, except by some extraordinary reform with
good luck to support it. And I was forced to say, when praising true
philosophy that it is by this that men are enabled to see what justice
in public and private life really is. Therefore, I said, there will be
no cessation of evils for the sons of men, till either those who are
pursuing a right and true philosophy receive sovereign power in the
States, or those in power in the States by some dispensation of
providence become true philosophers.

  With these thoughts in my mind I came to Italy and Sicily on my
first visit. My first impressions on arrival were those of strong
disapproval-disapproval of the kind of life which was there called the
life of happiness, stuffed full as it was with the banquets of the
Italian Greeks and Syracusans, who ate to repletion twice every day,
and were never without a partner for the night; and disapproval of the
habits which this manner of life produces. For with these habits
formed early in life, no man under heaven could possibly attain to
wisdom-human nature is not capable of such an extraordinary
combination. Temperance also is out of the question for such a man;
and the same applies to virtue generally. No city could remain in a
state of tranquillity under any laws whatsoever, when men think it
right to squander all their property in extravagant, and consider it a
duty to be idle in everything else except eating and drinking and
the laborious prosecution of debauchery. It follows necessarily that
the constitutions of such cities must be constantly changing,
tyrannies, oligarchies and democracies succeeding one another, while
those who hold the power cannot so much as endure the name of any form
of government which maintains justice and equality of rights.

  With a mind full of these thoughts, on the top of my previous
convictions, I crossed over to Syracuse-led there perhaps by
chance-but it really looks as if some higher power was even then
planning to lay a foundation for all that has now come to pass with
regard to Dion and Syracuse-and for further troubles too, I fear,
unless you listen to the advice which is now for the second time
offered by me. What do I mean by saying that my arrival in Sicily at
that movement proved to be the foundation on which all the sequel
rests? I was brought into close intercourse with Dion who was then a
young man, and explained to him my views as to the ideals at which men
should aim, advising him to carry them out in practice. In doing
this I seem to have been unaware that I was, in a fashion, without
knowing it, contriving the overthrow of the tyranny which;
subsequently took place. For Dion, who rapidly assimilated my teaching
as he did all forms of knowledge, listened to me with an eagerness
which I had never seen equalled in any young man, and resolved to live
for the future in a better way than the majority of Italian and
Sicilian Greeks, having set his affection on virtue in preference to
pleasure and self-indulgence. The result was that until the death of
Dionysios he lived in a way which rendered him somewhat unpopular
among those whose manner of life was that which is usual in the courts
of despots.

  After that event he came to the conclusion that this conviction,
which he himself had gained under the influence of good teaching,
was not likely to be confined to himself. Indeed, he saw it being
actually implanted in other minds-not many perhaps, but certainly in
some; and he thought that with the aid of the Gods, Dionysios might
perhaps become one of these, and that, if such a thing did come to
pass, the result would be a life of unspeakable happiness both for
himself and for the rest of the Syracusans. Further, he thought it
essential that I should come to Syracuse by all manner of means and
with the utmost possible speed to be his partner in these plans,
remembering in his own case how readily intercourse with me had
produced in him a longing for the noblest and best life. And if it
should produce a similar effect on Dionysios, as his aim was that it
should, he had great hope that, without bloodshed, loss of life, and
those disastrous events which have now taken place, he would be able
to introduce the true life of happiness throughout the whole
territory.

  Holding these sound views, Dion persuaded Dionysios to send for
me; he also wrote himself entreating me to come by all manner of means
and with the utmost possible speed, before certain other persons
coming in contact with Dionysios should turn him aside into some way
of life other than the best. What he said, though perhaps it is rather
long to repeat, was as follows: "What opportunities," he said,
"shall we wait for, greater than those now offered to us by
Providence?" And he described the Syracusan empire in Italy and
Sicily, his own influential position in it, and the youth of Dionysios
and how strongly his desire was directed towards philosophy and
education. His own nephews and relatives, he said, would be readily
attracted towards the principles and manner of life described by me,
and would be most influential in attracting Dionysios in the same
direction, so that, now if ever, we should see the accomplishment of
every hope that the same persons might actually become both
philosophers and the rulers of great States. These were the appeals
addressed to me and much more to the same effect.

  My own opinion, so far as the young men were concerned, and the
probable line which their conduct would take, was full of
apprehension-for young men are quick in forming desires, which often
take directions conflicting with one another. But I knew that the
character of Dion's mind was naturally a stable one and had also the
advantage of somewhat advanced years.

  Therefore, I pondered the matter and was in two minds as to
whether I ought to listen to entreaties and go, or how I ought to act;
and finally the scale turned in favour of the view that, if ever
anyone was to try to carry out in practice my ideas about laws and
constitutions, now was the time for making the attempt; for if only
I could fully convince one man, I should have secured thereby the
accomplishment of all good things.

  With these views and thus nerved to the task, I sailed from home, in
the spirit which some imagined, but principally through a feeling of
shame with regard to myself, lest I might some day appear to myself
wholly and solely a mere man of words, one who would never of his
own will lay his hand to any act. Also there was reason to think
that I should be betraying first and foremost my friendship and
comradeship with Dion, who in very truth was in a position of
considerable danger. If therefore anything should happen to him, or if
he were banished by Dionysios and his other enemies and coming to us
as exile addressed this question to me: "Plato, I have come to you
as a fugitive, not for want of hoplites, nor because I had no
cavalry for defence against my enemies, but for want of words and
power of persuasion, which I knew to be a special gift of yours,
enabling you to lead young men into the path of goodness and
justice, and to establish in every case relations of friendship and
comradeship among them. It is for the want of this assistance on
your part that I have left Syracuse and am here now. And the
disgrace attaching to your treatment of me is a small matter. But
philosophy-whose praises you are always singing, while you say she
is held in dishonour by the rest of mankind-must we not say that
philosophy along with me has now been betrayed, so far as your
action was concerned? Had I been living at Megara, you would certainly
have come to give me your aid towards the objects for which I asked
it; or you would have thought yourself the most contemptible of
mankind. But as it is, do you think that you will escape the
reputation of cowardice by making excuses about the distance of the
journey, the length of the sea voyage, and the amount of labour
involved? Far from it." To reproaches of this kind what creditable
reply could I have made? Surely none.

  I took my departure, therefore, acting, so far as a man can act,
in obedience to reason and justice, and for these reasons leaving my
own occupations, which were certainly not discreditable ones, to put
myself under a tyranny which did not seem likely to harmonise with
my teaching or with myself. By my departure I secured my own freedom
from the displeasure of Zeus Xenios, and made myself clear of any
charge on the part of philosophy, which would have been exposed to
detraction, if any disgrace had come upon me for faint-heartedness and
cowardice.

  On my arrival, to cut a long story short, I found the court of
Dionysios full of intrigues and of attempts to create in the sovereign
ill-feeling against Dion. I combated these as far as I could, but with
very little success; and in the fourth month or thereabouts,
charging Dion with conspiracy to seize the throne, Dionysios put him
on board a small boat and expelled him from Syracuse with ignominy.
All of us who were Dion's friends were afraid that he might take
vengeance on one or other of us as an accomplice in Dion's conspiracy.
With regard to me, there was even a rumour current in Syracuse that
I had been put to death by Dionysios as the cause of all that had
occurred. Perceiving that we were all in this state of mind and
apprehending that our fears might lead to some serious consequence, he
now tried to win all of us over by kindness: me in particular he
encouraged, bidding me be of good cheer and entreating me on all
grounds to remain. For my flight from him was not likely to redound to
his credit, but my staying might do so. Therefore, he made a great
pretence of entreating me. And we know that the entreaties of
sovereigns are mixed with compulsion. So to secure his object he
proceeded to render my departure impossible, bringing me into the
acropolis, and establishing me in quarters from which not a single
ship's captain would have taken me away against the will of Dionysios,
nor indeed without a special messenger sent by him to order my
removal. Nor was there a single merchant, or a single official in
charge of points of departure from the country, who would have allowed
me to depart unaccompanied, and would not have promptly seized me
and taken me back to Dionysios, especially since a statement had now
been circulated contradicting the previous rumours and giving out that
Dionysios was becoming extraordinarily attached to Plato. What were
the facts about this attachment? I must tell the truth. As time went
on, and as intercourse made him acquainted with my disposition and
character, he did become more and more attached to me, and wished me
to praise him more than I praised Dion, and to look upon him as more
specially my friend than Dion, and he was extraordinarily eager
about this sort of thing. But when confronted with the one way in
which this might have been done, if it was to be done at all, he
shrank from coming into close and intimate relations with me as a
pupil and listener to my discourses on philosophy, fearing the
danger suggested by mischief-makers, that he might be ensnared, and so
Dion would prove to have accomplished all his object. I endured all
this patiently, retaining the purpose with which I had come and the
hope that he might come to desire the philosophic life. But his
resistance prevailed against me.

  The time of my first visit to Sicily and my stay there was taken
up with all these incidents. On a later occasion I left home and again
came on an urgent summons from Dionysios. But before giving the
motives and particulars of my conduct then and showing how suitable
and right it was, I must first, in order that I may not treat as the
main point what is only a side issue, give you my advice as to what
your acts should be in the present position of affairs; afterwards, to
satisfy those who put the question why I came a second time, I will
deal fully with the facts about my second visit; what I have now to
say is this.

  He who advises a sick man, whose manner of life is prejudicial to
health, is clearly bound first of all to change his patient's manner
of life, and if the patient is willing to obey him, he may go on to
give him other advice. But if he is not willing, I shall consider
one who declines to advise such a patient to be a man and a physician,
and one who gives in to him to be unmanly and unprofessional. In the
same way with regard to a State, whether it be under a single ruler or
more than one, if, while the government is being carried on
methodically and in a right course, it asks advice about any details
of policy, it is the part of a wise man to advise such people. But
when men are travelling altogether outside the path of right
government and flatly refuse to move in the right path, and start by
giving notice to their adviser that he must leave the government alone
and make no change in it under penalty of death-if such men should
order their counsellors to pander to their wishes and desires and to
advise them in what way their object may most readily and easily be
once for all accomplished, I should consider as unmanly one who
accepts the duty of giving such forms of advice, and one who refuses
it to be a true man.

  Holding these views, whenever anyone consults me about any of the
weightiest matters affecting his own life, as, for instance, the
acquisition of property or the proper treatment of body or mind, if it
seems to me that his daily life rests on any system, or if he seems
likely to listen to advice about the things on which he consults me, I
advise him with readiness, and do not content myself with giving him a
merely perfunctory answer. But if a man does not consult me at all, or
evidently does not intend to follow my advice, I do not take the
initiative in advising such a man, and will not use compulsion to him,
even if he be my own son. I would advise a slave under such
circumstances, and would use compulsion to him if he were unwilling.
To a father or mother I do not think that piety allows one to offer
compulsion, unless they are suffering from an attack of insanity;
and if they are following any regular habits of life which please them
but do not please me, I would not offend them by offering useless,
advice, nor would I flatter them or truckle to them, providing them
with the means of satisfying desires which I myself would sooner die
than cherish. The wise man should go through life with the same
attitude of mind towards his country. If she should appear to him to
be following a policy which is not a good one, he should say so,
provided that his words are not likely either to fall on deaf ears
or to lead to the loss of his own life. But force against his native
land he should not use in order to bring about a change of
constitution, when it is not possible for the best constitution to
be introduced without driving men into exile or putting them to death;
he should keep quiet and offer up prayers for his own welfare and
for that of his country.

  These are the principles in accordance with which I should advise
you, as also, jointly with Dion, I advised Dionysios, bidding him in
the first place to live his daily life in a way that would make him as
far as possible master of himself and able to gain faithful friends
and supporters, in order that he might not have the same experience as
his father. For his father, having taken under his rule many great
cities of Sicily which had been utterly destroyed by the barbarians,
was not able to found them afresh and to establish in them trustworthy
governments carried on by his own supporters, either by men who had no
ties of blood with him, or by his brothers whom he had brought up when
they were younger, and had raised from humble station to high office
and from poverty to immense wealth. Not one of these was he able to
work upon by persuasion, instruction, services and ties of kindred, so
as to make him a partner in his rule; and he showed himself inferior
to Darius with a sevenfold inferiority. For Darius did not put his
trust in brothers or in men whom he had brought up, but only in his
confederates in the overthrow of the Mede and Eunuch; and to these
he assigned portions of his empire, seven in number, each of them
greater than all Sicily; and they were faithful to him and did not
attack either him or one another. Thus he showed a pattern of what the
good lawgiver and king ought to be; for he drew up laws by which he
has secured the Persian empire in safety down to the present time.

  Again, to give another instance, the Athenians took under their rule
very many cities not founded by themselves, which had been hard hit by
the barbarians but were still in existence, and maintained their
rule over these for seventy years, because they had in each them men
whom they could trust. But Dionysios, who had gathered the whole of
Sicily into a single city, and was so clever that he trusted no one,
only secured his own safety with great difficulty. For he was badly
off for trustworthy friends; and there is no surer criterion of virtue
and vice than this, whether a man is or is not destitute of such
friends.

  This, then, was the advice which Dion and I gave to Dionysios,
since, owing to bringing up which he had received from his father,
he had had no advantages in the way of education or of suitable
lessons, in the first place...; and, in the second place, that,
after starting in this way, he should make friends of others among his
connections who were of the same age and were in sympathy with his
pursuit of virtue, but above all that he should be in harmony with
himself; for this it was of which he was remarkably in need. This we
did not say in plain words, for that would not have been safe; but
in covert language we maintained that every man in this way would save
both himself and those whom he was leading, and if he did not follow
this path, he would do just the opposite of this. And after proceeding
on the course which we described, and making himself a wise and
temperate man, if he were then to found again the cities of Sicily
which had been laid waste, and bind them together by laws and
constitutions, so as to be loyal to him and to one another in their
resistance to the attacks of the barbarians, he would, we told him,
make his father's empire not merely double what it was but many
times greater. For, if these things were done, his way would be
clear to a more complete subjugation of the Carthaginians than that
which befell them in Gelon's time, whereas in our own day his father
had followed the opposite course of levying attribute for the
barbarians. This was the language and these the exhortations given
by us, the conspirators against Dionysios according to the charges
circulated from various sources-charges which, prevailing as they
did with Dionysios, caused the expulsion of Dion and reduced me to a
state of apprehension. But when-to summarise great events which
happened in no great time-Dion returned from the Peloponnese and
Athens, his advice to Dionysios took the form of action.

  To proceed-when Dion had twice over delivered the city and
restored it to the citizens, the Syracusans went through the same
changes of feeling towards him as Dionysios had gone through, when
Dion attempted first to educate him and train him to be a sovereign
worthy of supreme power and, when that was done, to be his coadjutor
in all the details of his career. Dionysios listened to those who
circulated slanders to the effect that Dion was aiming at the
tyranny in all the steps which he took at that time his intention
being that Dionysios, when his mind had fallen under the spell of
culture, should neglect the government and leave it in his hands,
and that he should then appropriate it for himself and treacherously
depose Dionysios. These slanders were victorious on that occasion;
they were so once more when circulated among the Syracusans, winning a
victory which took an extraordinary course and proved disgraceful to
its authors. The story of what then took place is one which deserves
careful attention on the part of those who are inviting me to deal
with the present situation.

  I, an Athenian and friend of Dion, came as his ally to the court
of Dionysios, in order that I might create good will in place of a
state war; in my conflict with the authors of these slanders I was
worsted. When Dionysios tried to persuade me by offers of honours
and wealth to attach myself to him, and with a view to giving a decent
colour to Dion's expulsion a witness and friend on his side, he failed
completely in his attempt. Later on, when Dion returned from exile, he
took with him from Athens two brothers, who had been his friends,
not from community in philosophic study, but with the ordinary
companionship common among most friends, which they form as the result
of relations of hospitality and the intercourse which occurs when
one man initiates the other in the mysteries. It was from this kind of
intercourse and from services connected with his return that these two
helpers in his restoration became his companions. Having come to
Sicily, when they perceived that Dion had been misrepresented to the
Sicilian Greeks, whom he had liberated, as one that plotted to
become monarch, they not only betrayed their companion and friend, but
shared personally in the guilt of his murder, standing by his
murderers as supporters with weapons in their hands. The guilt and
impiety of their conduct I neither excuse nor do I dwell upon it.
For many others make it their business to harp upon it, and will
make it their business in the future. But I do take exception to the
statement that, because they were Athenians, they have brought shame
upon this city. For I say that he too is an Athenian who refused to
betray this same Dion, when he had the offer of riches and many
other honours. For his was no common or vulgar friendship, but
rested on community in liberal education, and this is the one thing in
which a wise man will put his trust, far more than in ties of personal
and bodily kinship. So the two murderers of Dion were not of
sufficient importance to be causes of disgrace to this city, as though
they had been men of any note.

  All this has been said with a view to counselling the friends and
family of Dion. And in addition to this I give for the third time to
you the same advice and counsel which I have given twice before to
others-not to enslave Sicily or any other State to despots-this my
counsel but-to put it under the rule of laws-for the other course is
better neither for the enslavers nor for the enslaved, for themselves,
their children's children and descendants; the attempt is in every way
fraught with disaster. It is only small and mean natures that are bent
upon seizing such gains for themselves, natures that know nothing of
goodness and justice, divine as well as human, in this life and in the
next.

  These are the lessons which I tried to teach, first to Dion,
secondly to Dionysios, and now for the third time to you. Do you
obey me thinking of Zeus the Preserver, the patron of third
ventures, and looking at the lot of Dionysios and Dion, of whom the
one who disobeyed me is living in dishonour, while he who obeyed me
has died honourably. For the one thing which is wholly right and noble
is to strive for that which is most honourable for a man's self and
for his country, and to face the consequences whatever they may be.
For none of us can escape death, nor, if a man could do so, would
it, as the vulgar suppose, make him happy. For nothing evil or good,
which is worth mentioning at all, belongs to things soulless; but good
or evil will be the portion of every soul, either while attached to
the body or when separated from it.

  And we should in very truth always believe those ancient and
sacred teachings, which declare that the soul is immortal, that it has
judges, and suffers the greatest penalties when it has been
separated from the body. Therefore also we should consider it a lesser
evil to suffer great wrongs and outrages than to do them. The covetous
man, impoverished as he is in the soul, turns a deaf ear to this
teaching; or if he hears it, he laughs it to scorn with fancied
superiority, and shamelessly snatches for himself from every source
whatever his bestial fancy supposes will provide for him the means
of eating or drinking or glutting himself with that slavish and
gross pleasure which is falsely called after the goddess of love. He
is blind and cannot see in those acts of plunder which are accompanied
by impiety what heinous guilt is attached to each wrongful deed, and
that the offender must drag with him the burden of this impiety
while he moves about on earth, and when he has travelled beneath the
earth on a journey which has every circumstance of shame and misery.

  It was by urging these and other like truths that I convinced
Dion, and it is I who have the best right to be angered with his
murderers in much the same way as I have with Dionysios. For both they
and he have done the greatest injury to me, and I might almost say
to all mankind, they by slaying the man that was willing to act
righteously, and he by refusing to act righteously during the whole of
his rule, when he held supreme power, in which rule if philosophy
and power had really met together, it would have sent forth a light to
all men, Greeks and barbarians, establishing fully for all the true
belief that there can be no happiness either for the community or
for the individual man, unless he passes his life under the rule of
righteousness with the guidance of wisdom, either possessing these
virtues in himself, or living under the rule of godly men and having
received a right training and education in morals. These were the aims
which Dionysios injured, and for me everything else is a trifling
injury compared with this.

  The murderer of Dion has, without knowing it, done the same as
Dionysios. For as regards Dion, I know right well, so far as it is
possible for a man to say anything positively about other men, that,
if he had got the supreme power, he would never have turned his mind
to any other form of rule, but that, dealing first with Syracuse,
his own native land, when he had made an end of her slavery, clothed
her in bright apparel, and given her the garb of freedom, he would
then by every means in his power have ordered aright the lives of
his fellow-citizens by suitable and excellent laws; and the thing next
in order, which he would have set his heart to accomplish, was to
found again all the States of Sicily and make them free from the
barbarians, driving out some and subduing others, an easier task for
him than it was for Hiero. If these things had been accomplished by
a man who was just and brave and temperate and a philosopher, the same
belief with regard to virtue would have been established among the
majority which, if Dionysios had been won over, would have been
established, I might almost say, among all mankind and would have
given them salvation. But now some higher power or avenging fiend
has fallen upon them, inspiring them with lawlessness, godlessness and
acts of recklessness issuing from ignorance, the seed from which all
evils for all mankind take root and grow and will in future bear the
bitterest harvest for those who brought them into being. This
ignorance it was which in that second venture wrecked and ruined
everything.

  And now, for good luck's sake, let us on this third venture
abstain from words of ill omen. But, nevertheless, I advise you, his
friends, to imitate in Dion his love for his country and his temperate
habits of daily life, and to try with better auspices to carry out his
wishes-what these were, you have heard from me in plain words. And
whoever among you cannot live the simple Dorian life according to
the customs of your forefathers, but follows the manner of life of
Dion's murderers and of the Sicilians, do not invite this man to
join you, or expect him to do any loyal or salutary act; but invite
all others to the work of resettling all the States of Sicily and
establishing equality under the laws, summoning them from Sicily
itself and from the whole Peloponnese-and have no fear even of Athens;
for there, also, are men who excel all mankind in their devotion to
virtue and in hatred of the reckless acts of those who shed the
blood of friends.

  But if, after all, this is work for a future time, whereas immediate
action is called for by the disorders of all sorts and kinds which
arise every day from your state of civil strife, every man to whom
Providence has given even a moderate share of right intelligence ought
to know that in times of civil strife there is no respite from trouble
till the victors make an end of feeding their grudge by combats and
banishments and executions, and of wreaking their vengeance on their
enemies. They should master themselves and, enacting impartial laws,
framed not to gratify themselves more than the conquered party, should
compel men to obey these by two restraining forces, respect and
fear; fear, because they are the masters and can display superior
force; respect, because they rise superior to pleasures and are
willing and able to be servants to the laws. There is no other way
save this for terminating the troubles of a city that is in a state of
civil strife; but a constant continuance of internal disorders,
struggles, hatred and mutual distrust is the common lot of cities
which are in that plight.

  Therefore, those who have for the time being gained the upper
hand, when they desire to secure their position, must by their own act
and choice select from all Hellas men whom they have ascertained to be
the best for the purpose. These must in the first place be men of
mature years, who have children and wives at home, and, as far as
possible, a long line of ancestors of good repute, and all must be
possessed of sufficient property. For a city of ten thousand
householders their numbers should be fifty; that is enough. These they
must induce to come from their own homes by entreaties and the promise
of the highest honours; and having induced them to come they must
entreat and command them to draw up laws after binding themselves by
oath to show no partiality either to conquerors or to conquered, but
to give equal and common rights to the whole State.

  When laws have been enacted, what everything then hinges on is this.
If the conquerors show more obedience to the laws than the
conquered, the whole State will be full of security and happiness, and
there will be an escape from all your troubles. But if they do not,
then do not summon me or any other helper to aid you against those who
do not obey the counsel I now give you. For this course is akin to
that which Dion and I attempted to carry out with our hearts set on
the welfare of Syracuse. It is indeed a second best course. The
first and best was that scheme of welfare to all mankind which we
attempted to carry out with the co-operation of Dionysios; but some
chance, mightier than men, brought it to nothing. Do you now, with
good fortune attending you and with Heaven's help, try to bring your
efforts to a happier issue.

  Let this be the end of my advice and injunction and of the narrative
of my first visit to Dionysios. Whoever wishes may next hear of my
second journey and voyage, and learn that it was a reasonable and
suitable proceeding. My first period of residence in Sicily was
occupied in the way which I related before giving my advice to the
relatives and friends of Dion. After those events I persuaded
Dionysios by such arguments as I could to let me go; and we made an
agreement as to what should be done when peace was made; for at that
time there was a state of war in Sicily. Dionysios said that, when
he had put the affairs of his empire in a position of greater safety
for himself, he would send for Dion and me again; and he desired
that Dion should regard what had befallen him not as an exile, but
as a change of residence. I agreed to come again on these conditions.

  When peace had been made, he began sending for me; he requested that
Dion should wait for another year, but begged that I should by all
means come. Dion now kept urging and entreating me to go. For
persistent rumours came from Sicily that Dionysios was now once more
possessed by an extraordinary desire for philosophy. For this reason
Dion pressed me urgently not to decline his invitation. But though I
was well aware that as regards philosophy such symptoms were not
uncommon in young men, still it seemed to me safer at that time to
part company altogether with Dion and Dionysios; and I offended both
of them by replying that I was an old man, and that the steps now
being taken were quite at variance with the previous agreement.

  After this, it seems, Archytes came to the court of Dionysios.
Before my departure I had brought him and his Tarentine circle into
friendly relations with Dionysios. There were some others in
Syracuse who had received some instruction from Dion, and others had
learnt from these, getting their heads full of erroneous teaching on
philosophical questions. These, it seems, were attempting to hold
discussions with Dionysios on questions connected with such
subjects, in the idea that he had been fully instructed in my views.
Now is not at all devoid of natural gifts for learning, and he has a
great craving for honour and glory. What was said probably pleased
him, and he felt some shame when it became clear that he had not taken
advantage of my teaching during my visit. For these reasons he
conceived a desire for more definite instruction, and his love of
glory was an additional incentive to him. The real reasons why he
had learnt nothing during my previous visit have just been set forth
in the preceding narrative. Accordingly, now that I was safe at home
and had refused his second invitation, as I just now related,
Dionysios seems to have felt all manner of anxiety lest certain people
should suppose that I was unwilling to visit him again because I had
formed a poor opinion of his natural gifts and character, and because,
knowing as I did his manner of life, I disapproved of it.

  It is right for me to speak the truth, and make no complaint if
anyone, after hearing the facts, forms a poor opinion of my
philosophy, and thinks that the tyrant was in the right. Dionysios now
invited me for the third time, sending a trireme to ensure me
comfort on the voyage; he sent also Archedemos-one of those who had
spent some time with Archytes, and of whom he supposed that I had a
higher opinion than of any of the Sicilian Greeks-and, with him, other
men of repute in Sicily. These all brought the same report, that
Dionysios had made progress in philosophy. He also sent a very long
letter, knowing as he did my relations with Dion and Dion's
eagerness also that I should take ship and go to Syracuse. The
letter was framed in its opening sentences to meet all these
conditions, and the tenor of it was as follows: "Dionysios to
Plato," here followed the customary greeting and immediately after
it he said, "If in compliance with our request you come now, in the
first place, Dion's affairs will be dealt with in whatever way you
yourself desire; I know that you will desire what is reasonable, and I
shall consent to it. But if not, none of Dion's affairs will have
results in accordance with your wishes, with regard either to Dion
himself or to other matters." This he said in these words; the rest it
would be tedious and inopportune to quote. Other letters arrived
from Archytes and the Tarentines, praising the philosophical studies
of Dionysios and saying that, if I did not now come, I should cause
a complete rupture in their friendship with Dionysios, which had
been brought about by me and was of no small importance to their
political interests.

  When this invitation came to me at that time in such terms, and
those who had come from Sicily and Italy were trying to drag me
thither, while my friends at Athens were literally pushing me out with
their urgent entreaties, it was the same old tale-that I must not
betray Dion and my Tarentine friends and supporters. Also I myself had
a lurking feeling that there was nothing surprising in the fact that a
young man, quick to learn, hearing talk of the great truths of
philosophy, should feel a craving for the higher life. I thought
therefore that I must put the matter definitely to the test to see
whether his desire was genuine or the reverse, and on no account leave
such an impulse unaided nor make myself responsible for such a deep
and real disgrace, if the reports brought by anyone were really
true. So blindfolding myself with this reflection, I set out, with
many fears and with no very favourable anticipations, as was natural
enough. However, I went, and my action on this occasion at any rate
was really a case of "the third to the Preserver," for I had the
good fortune to return safely; and for this I must, next to the God,
thank Dionysios, because, though many wished to make an end of me,
he prevented them and paid some proper respect to my situation.

  On my arrival, I thought that first I must put to the test the
question whether Dionysios had really been kindled with the fire of
philosophy, or whether all the reports which had come to Athens were
empty rumours. Now there is a way of putting such things to the test
which is not to be despised and is well suited to monarchs, especially
to those who have got their heads full of erroneous teaching, which
immediately my arrival I found to be very much the case with
Dionysios. One should show such men what philosophy is in all its
extent; what their range of studies is by which it is approached,
and how much labour it involves. For the man who has heard this, if he
has the true philosophic spirit and that godlike temperament which
makes him a kin to philosophy and worthy of it, thinks that he has
been told of a marvellous road lying before him, that he must
forthwith press on with all his strength, and that life is not worth
living if he does anything else. After this he uses to the full his
own powers and those of his guide in the path, and relaxes not his
efforts, till he has either reached the end of the whole course of
study or gained such power that he is not incapable of directing his
steps without the aid of a guide. This is the spirit and these are the
thoughts by which such a man guides his life, carrying out his work,
whatever his occupation may be, but throughout it all ever cleaving to
philosophy and to such rules of diet in his daily life as will give
him inward sobriety and therewith quickness in learning, a good
memory, and reasoning power; the kind of life which is opposed to this
he consistently hates. Those who have not the true philosophic temper,
but a mere surface colouring of opinions penetrating, like sunburn,
only skin deep, when they see how great the range of studies is, how
much labour is involved in it, and how necessary to the pursuit it
is to have an orderly regulation of the daily life, come to the
conclusion that the thing is difficult and impossible for them, and
are actually incapable of carrying out the course of study; while some
of them persuade themselves that they have sufficiently studied the
whole matter and have no need of any further effort. This is the
sure test and is the safest one to apply to those who live in luxury
and are incapable of continuous effort; it ensures that such a man
shall not throw the blame upon his teacher but on himself, because
he cannot bring to the pursuit all the qualities necessary to it. Thus
it came about that I said to Dionysios what I did say on that
occasion.

  I did not, however, give a complete exposition, nor did Dionysios
ask for one. For he professed to know many, and those the most
important, points, and to have a sufficient hold of them through
instruction given by others. I hear also that he has since written
about what he heard from me, composing what professes to be his own
handbook, very different, so he says, from the doctrines which he
heard from me; but of its contents I know nothing; I know indeed
that others have written on the same subjects; but who they are, is
more than they know themselves. Thus much at least, I can say about
all writers, past or future, who say they know the things to which I
devote myself, whether by hearing the teaching of me or of others,
or by their own discoveries-that according to my view it is not
possible for them to have any real skill in the matter. There
neither is nor ever will be a treatise of mine on the subject. For
it does not admit of exposition like other branches of knowledge;
but after much converse about the matter itself and a life lived
together, suddenly a light, as it were, is kindled in one soul by a
flame that leaps to it from another, and thereafter sustains itself.
Yet this much I know-that if the things were written or put into
words, it would be done best by me, and that, if they were written
badly, I should be the person most pained. Again, if they had appeared
to me to admit adequately of writing and exposition, what task in life
could I have performed nobler than this, to write what is of great
service to mankind and to bring the nature of things into the light
for all to see? But I do not think it a good thing for men that
there should be a disquisition, as it is called, on this
topic-except for some few, who are able with a little teaching to find
it out for themselves. As for the rest, it would fill some of them
quite illogically with a mistaken feeling of contempt, and others with
lofty and vain-glorious expectations, as though they had learnt
something high and mighty.

  On this point I intend to speak a little more at length; for
perhaps, when I have done so, things will be clearer with regard to my
present subject. There is an argument which holds good against the man
ventures to put anything whatever into writing on questions of this
nature; it has often before been stated by me, and it seems suitable
to the present occasion.

  For everything that exists there are three instruments by which
the knowledge of it is necessarily imparted; fourth, there is the
knowledge itself, and, as fifth, we must count the thing itself
which is known and truly exists. The first is the name, the, second
the definition, the third. the image, and the fourth the knowledge. If
you wish to learn what I mean, take these in the case of one instance,
and so understand them in the case of all. A circle is a thing
spoken of, and its name is that very word which we have just
uttered. The second thing belonging to it is its definition, made up
names and verbal forms. For that which has the name "round,"
"annular," or, "circle," might be defined as that which has the
distance from its circumference to its centre everywhere equal. Third,
comes that which is drawn and rubbed out again, or turned on a lathe
and broken up-none of which things can happen to the circle
itself-to which the other things, mentioned have reference; for it
is something of a different order from them. Fourth, comes
knowledge, intelligence and right opinion about these things. Under
this one head we must group everything which has its existence, not in
words nor in bodily shapes, but in souls-from which it is dear that it
is something different from the nature of the circle itself and from
the three things mentioned before. Of these things intelligence
comes closest in kinship and likeness to the fifth, and the others are
farther distant.

  The same applies to straight as well as to circular form, to
colours, to the good, the, beautiful, the just, to all bodies
whether manufactured or coming into being in the course of nature,
to fire, water, and all such things, to every living being, to
character in souls, and to all things done and suffered. For in the
case of all these, no one, if he has not some how or other got hold of
the four things first mentioned, can ever be completely a partaker
of knowledge of the fifth. Further, on account of the weakness of
language, these (i.e., the four) attempt to show what each thing is
like, not less than what each thing is. For this reason no man of
intelligence will venture to express his philosophical views in
language, especially not in language that is unchangeable, which is
true of that which is set down in written characters.

  Again you must learn the point which comes next. Every circle, of
those which are by the act of man drawn or even turned on a lathe,
is full of that which is opposite to the fifth thing. For everywhere
it has contact with the straight. But the circle itself, we say, has
nothing in either smaller or greater, of that which is its opposite.
We say also that the name is not a thing of permanence for any of
them, and that nothing prevents the things now called round from being
called straight, and the straight things round; for those who make
changes and call things by opposite names, nothing will be less
permanent (than a name). Again with regard to the definition, if it is
made up of names and verbal forms, the same remark holds that there is
no sufficiently durable permanence in it. And there is no end to the
instances of the ambiguity from which each of the four suffers; but
the greatest of them is that which we mentioned a little earlier,
that, whereas there are two things, that which has real being, and
that which is only a quality, when the soul is seeking to know, not
the quality, but the essence, each of the four, presenting to the soul
by word and in act that which it is not seeking (i.e., the quality), a
thing open to refutation by the senses, being merely the thing
presented to the soul in each particular case whether by statement
or the act of showing, fills, one may say, every man with puzzlement
and perplexity.

  Now in subjects in which, by reason of our defective education, we
have not been accustomed even to search for the truth, but are
satisfied with whatever images are presented to us, we are not held up
to ridicule by one another, the questioned by questioners, who can
pull to pieces and criticise the four things. But in subjects where we
try to compel a man to give a clear answer about the fifth, any one of
those who are capable of overthrowing an antagonist gets the better of
us, and makes the man, who gives an exposition in speech or writing or
in replies to questions, appear to most of his hearers to know nothing
of the things on which he is attempting to write or speak; for they
are sometimes not aware that it is not the mind of the writer or
speaker which is proved to be at fault, but the defective nature of
each of the four instruments. The process however of dealing with
all of these, as the mind moves up and down to each in turn, does
after much effort give birth in a well-constituted mind to knowledge
of that which is well constituted. But if a man is ill-constituted
by nature (as the state of the soul is naturally in the majority
both in its capacity for learning and in what is called moral
character)-or it may have become so by deterioration-not even
Lynceus could endow such men with the power of sight.

  In one word, the man who has no natural kinship with this matter
cannot be made akin to it by quickness of learning or memory; for it
cannot be engendered at all in natures which are foreign to it.
Therefore, if men are not by nature kinship allied to justice and
all other things that are honourable, though they may be good at
learning and remembering other knowledge of various kinds-or if they
have the kinship but are slow learners and have no memory-none of
all these will ever learn to the full the truth about virtue and vice.
For both must be learnt together; and together also must be learnt, by
complete and long continued study, as I said at the beginning, the
true and the false about all that has real being. After much effort,
as names, definitions, sights, and other data of sense, are brought
into contact and friction one with another, in the course of
scrutiny and kindly testing by men who proceed by question and
answer without ill will, with a sudden flash there shines forth
understanding about every problem, and an intelligence whose efforts
reach the furthest limits of human powers. Therefore every man of
worth, when dealing with matters of worth, will be far from exposing
them to ill feeling and misunderstanding among men by committing
them to writing. In one word, then, it may be known from this that, if
one sees written treatises composed by anyone, either the laws of a
lawgiver, or in any other form whatever, these are not for that man
the things of most worth, if he is a man of worth, but that his
treasures are laid up in the fairest spot that he possesses. But if
these things were worked at by him as things of real worth, and
committed to writing, then surely, not gods, but men "have
themselves bereft him of his wits."

  Anyone who has followed this discourse and digression will know well
that, if Dionysios or anyone else, great or small, has written a
treatise on the highest matters and the first principles of things, he
has, so I say, neither heard nor learnt any sound teaching about the
subject of his treatise; otherwise, he would have had the same
reverence for it, which I have, and would have shrunk from putting
it forth into a world of discord and uncomeliness. For he wrote it,
not as an aid to memory-since there is no risk of forgetting it, if
a man's soul has once laid hold of it; for it is expressed in the
shortest of statements-but if he wrote it at all, it was from a mean
craving for honour, either putting it forth as his own invention, or
to figure as a man possessed of culture, of which he was not worthy,
if his heart was set on the credit of possessing it. If then Dionysios
gained this culture from the one lesson which he had from me, we may
perhaps grant him the possession of it, though how he acquired
it-God wot, as the Theban says; for I gave him the teaching, which I
have described, on that one occasion and never again.

  The next point which requires to be made clear to anyone who
wishes to discover how things really happened, is the reason why it
came about that I did not continue my teaching in a second and third
lesson and yet oftener. Does Dionysios, after a single lesson, believe
himself to know the matter, and has he an adequate knowledge of it,
either as having discovered it for himself or learnt it before from
others, or does he believe my teaching to be worthless, or, thirdly,
to be beyond his range and too great for him, and himself to be really
unable to live as one who gives his mind to wisdom and virtue? For
if he thinks it worthless, he will have to contend with many who say
the opposite, and who would be held in far higher repute as judges
than Dionysios, if on the other hand, he thinks he has discovered or
learnt the things and that they are worth having as part of a
liberal education, how could he, unless he is an extraordinary person,
have so recklessly dishonoured the master who has led the way in these
subjects? How he dishonoured him, I will now state.

  Up to this time he had allowed Dion to remain in possession of his
property and to receive the income from it. But not long after the
foregoing events, as if he had entirely forgotten his letter to that
effect, he no longer allowed Dion's trustees to send him remittances
to the Peloponnese, on the pretence that the owner of the property was
not Dion but Dion's son, his own nephew, of whom he himself was
legally the trustee. These were the actual facts which occurred up
to the point which we have reached. They had opened my eyes as to
the value of Dionysios' desire for philosophy, and I had every right
to complain, whether I wished to do so or not. Now by this time it was
summer and the season for sea voyages; therefore I decided that I must
not be vexed with Dionysios rather than with myself and those who
had forced me to come for the third time into the strait of Scylla,

               that once again I might

         To fell Charybdis measure back my course,

but must tell Dionysios that it was impossible for me to remain
after this outrage had been put upon Dion. He tried to soothe me and
begged me to remain, not thinking it desirable for himself that I
should arrive post haste in person as the bearer of such tidings. When
his entreaties produced no effect, he promised that he himself would
provide me with transport. For my intention was to embark on one of
the trading ships and sail away, being indignant and thinking it my
duty to face all dangers, in case I was prevented from going-since
plainly and obviously I was doing no wrong, but was the party wronged.

  Seeing me not at all inclined to stay, he devised the following
scheme to make me stay during that sading season. On the next day he
came to me and made a plausible proposal: "Let us put an end," he
said, "to these constant quarrels between you and me about Dion and
his affairs. For your sake I will do this for Dion. I require him to
take his own property and reside in the Peloponnese, not as an
exile, but on the understanding that it is open for him to migrate
here, when this step has the joint approval of himself, me, and you
his friends; and this shall be open to him on the understanding that
he does not plot against me. You and your friends and Dion's friends
here must be sureties for him in this, and he must give you
security. Let the funds which he receives be deposited in the
Peloponnese and at Athens, with persons approved by you, and let
Dion enjoy the income from them but have no power to take them out
of deposit without the approval of you and your friends. For I have no
great confidence in him, that, if he has this property at his
disposal, he will act justly towards me, for it will be no small
amount; but I have more confidence in you and your friends. See if
this satisfies you; and on these conditions remain for the present
year, and at the next season you shall depart taking the property with
you. I am quite sure that Dion will be grateful to you, if you
accomplish so much on his behalf."

  When I heard this proposal I was vexed, but after reflection said
I would let him know my view of it on the following day. We agreed
to that effect for the moment, and afterwards when I was by myself I
pondered the matter in much distress. The first reflection that came
up, leading the way in my self-communing, was this: "Come suppose that
Dionysios intends to do none of the things which he has mentioned, but
that, after my departure, he writes a plausible letter to Dion, and
orders several of his creatures to write to the same effect, telling
him of the proposal which he has now made to me, making out that he
was willing to do what he proposed, but that I refused and
completely neglected Dion's interests. Further, suppose that he is not
willing to allow my departure, and without giving personal orders to
any of the merchants, makes it clear, as he easily can, to all that he
not wish me to sail, will anyone consent to take me as a passenger,
when I leave the house: of Dionysios?"

  For in addition to my other troubles, I was lodging at that time
in the garden which surround his house, from which even the gatekeeper
would have refused to let me go, unless an order had been sent to
him from Dionysios. "Suppose however that I wait for the year, I shall
be able to write word of these things to Dion, stating the position in
which I am, and the steps which I am trying to take. And if
Dionysios does any of the things which he says, I shall have
accomplished something that is not altogether to be sneered at; for
Dion's property is, at a fair estimate, perhaps not less than a
hundred talents. If however the prospect which I see looming in the
future takes the course which may reasonably be expected, I know not
what I shall do with myself. Still it is perhaps necessary to go on
working for a year, and to attempt to prove by actual fact the
machinations of Dionysios."

  Having come to this decision, on the following day I said to
Dionysios, "I have decided to remain. But," I continued, "I must ask
that you will not regard me as empowered to act for Dion, but will
along with me write a letter to him, stating what has now been
decided, and enquire whether this course satisfies him. If it does
not, and if he has other wishes and demands, he must write particulars
of them as soon as possible, and you must not as yet take any hasty
step with regard to his interests."

  This was what was said and this was the agreement which was made,
almost in these words. Well, after this the trading-ships took their
departure, and it was no longer possible for me to take mine, when
Dionysios, if you please, addressed me with the remark that half the
property must be regarded as belonging to Dion and half to his son.
Therefore, he said, he would sell it, and when it was sold would
give half to me to take away, and would leave half on the spot for the
son. This course, he said, was the most just. This proposal was a blow
to me, and I thought it absurd to argue any longer with him;
however, I said that we must wait for Dion's letter, and then once
more write to tell him of this new proposal. His next step was the
brilliant one of selling the whole of Dion's property, using his own
discretion with regard to the manner and terms of the sale and of
the purchasers. He spoke not a word to me about the matter from
beginning to end, and I followed his example and never talked to him
again about Dion's affairs; for I did not think that I could do any
good by doing so. This is the history so far of my efforts to come
to the rescue of philosophy and of my friends.

  After this Dionysios and I went on with our daily life, I with my
eyes turned abroad like a bird yearning to fly from its perch, and
he always devising some new way of scaring me back and of keeping a
tight hold on Dion's property. However, we gave out to all Sicily that
we were friends. Dionysios, now deserting the policy of his father,
attempted to lower the pay of the older members of his body guard. The
soldiers were furious, and, assembling in great numbers, declared that
they would not submit. He attempted to use force to them, shutting the
gates of the acropolis; but they charged straight for the walls,
yelling out an unintelligible and ferocious war cry. Dionysios took
fright and conceded all their demands and more to the peltasts then
assembled.

  A rumour soon spread that Heracleides had been the cause of all
the trouble. Hearing this, Heracleides kept out of the way.
Dionysios was trying to get hold of him, and being unable to do so,
sent for Theodotes to come to him in his garden. It happened that I
was walking in the garden at the same time. I neither know nor did I
hear the rest of what passed between them, but what Theodotes said
to Dionysios in my presence I know and remember. "Plato," he said,
"I am trying to convince our friend Dionysios that, if I am able to
bring Heracleides before us to defend himself on the charges which
have been made against him, and if he decides that Heracleides must no
longer live in Sicily, he should be allowed (this is my point) to take
his son and wife and sail to the Peloponnese and reside there,
taking no action there against Dionysios and enjoying the income of
his property. I have already sent for him and will send for him again;
and if he comes in obedience either to my former message or to this
one-well and good. But I beg and entreat Dionysios that, if anyone
finds Heracleides either in the country or here, no harm shall come to
him, but that he may retire from the country till Dionysios comes to
some other decision. Do you agree to this?" he added, addressing
Dionysios. "I agree," he replied, "that even if he is found at your
house, no harm shall be done to him beyond what has now been said."

  On the following day Eurybios and Theodotes came to me in the
evening, both greatly disturbed. Theodotes said, "Plato, you were
present yesterday during the promises made by Dionysios to me and to
you about Heracleides?" "Certainly," I replied. "Well," he
continued, "at this moment peltasts are scouring the country seeking
to arrest Heracleides; and he must be somewhere in this neighbourhood.
For Heaven's sake come with us to Dionysios." So we went and stood
in the presence of Dionysios; and those two stood shedding silent
tears, while I said: "These men are afraid that you may take strong
measures with regard to Heracleides contrary to what was agreed
yesterday. For it seems that he has returned and has been seen
somewhere about here." On hearing this he blazed up and turned all
colours, as a man would in a rage. Theodotes, falling before him in
tears, took his hand and entreated him to do nothing of the sort.
But I broke in and tried to encourage him, saying: "Be of good
cheer, Theodotes; Dionysios will not have the heart to take any
fresh step contrary to his promises of yesterday." Fixing his eye on
me, and assuming his most autocratic air he said, "To you I promised
nothing small or great." "By the gods," I said, "you did promise
that forbearance for which our friend here now appeals." With these
words I turned away and went out. After this he continued the hunt for
Heracleides, and Theodotes, sending messages, urged Heracleides to
take flight. Dionysios sent out Teisias and some peltasts with
orders to pursue him. But Heracleides, as it was said, was just in
time, by a small fraction of a day, in making his escape into
Carthaginian territory.

  After this Dionysios thought that his long cherished scheme not to
restore Dion's property would give him a plausible excuse for
hostility towards me; and first of all he sent me out of the
acropolis, finding a pretext that the women were obliged to hold a
sacrificial service for ten days in the garden in which I had my
lodging. He therefore ordered me to stay outside in the house of
Archedemos during this period. While I was there, Theodotes sent for
me and made a great outpouring of indignation at these occurrences,
throwing the blame on Dionysios. Hearing that I had been to see
Theodotes he regarded this, as another excuse, sister to the
previous one, for quarrelling with me. Sending a messenger he enquired
if I had really been conferring with Theodotes on his invitation
"Certainly," I replied, "Well," continued the messenger, "he ordered
me to tell you that you are not acting at all well in preferring
always Dion and Dion's friends to him." And he did not send for me
to return to his house, as though it were now clear that Theodotes and
Heracleides were my friends, and he my enemy. He also thought that I
had no kind feelings towards him because the property of Dion was
now entirely done for.

  After this I resided outside the acropolis among the mercenaries.
Various people then came to me, among them those of the ships' crews
who came from Athens, my own fellow citizens, and reported that I
was evil spoken of among the peltasts, and that some of them were
threatening to make an end of me, if they could ket hold of me
Accordingly I devised the following plan for my safety.

  I sent to Archytes and my other friends in Taras, telling them the
plight I was in. Finding some excuse for an embassy from their city,
they sent a thirty-oared galley with Lamiscos, one of themselves,
who came and entreated Dionysios about me, saying that I wanted to go,
and that he should on no account stand in my way. He consented and
allowed me to go, giving me money for the journey. But for Dion's
property I made no further request, nor was any of it restored.

  I made my way to the Peloponnese to Olympia, where I found Dion a
spectator at the Games, and told him what had occurred. Calling Zeus
to be his witness, he at once urged me with my relatives and friends
to make preparations for taking vengeance on Dionysios-our ground
for action being the breach of faith to a guest-so he put it and
regarded it, while his own was his unjust expulsion and banishment.
Hearing this, I told him that he might call my friends to his aid,
if they wished to go; "But for myself," I continued, "you and others
in a way forced me to be the sharer of Dionysios' table and hearth and
his associate in the acts of religion. He probably believed the
current slanders, that I was plotting with you against him and his
despotic rule; yet feelings of scruple prevailed with him, and he
spared my life. Again, I am hardly of the age for being comrade in
arms to anyone; also I stand as a neutral between you, if ever you
desire friendship and wish to benefit one another; so long as you
aim at injuring one another, call others to your aid." This I said,
because I was disgusted with my misguided journeyings to Sicily and my
ill-fortune there. But they disobeyed me and would not listen to my
attempts at reconciliation, and so brought on their own heads all
the evils which have since taken place. For if Dionysios had
restored to Dion his property or been reconciled with him on any
terms, none of these things would have happened, so far as human
foresight can foretell. Dion would have easily been kept in check by
my wishes and influence. But now, rushing upon one another, they
have caused universal disaster.

  Dion's aspiration however was the same that I should say my own or
that of any other right-minded man ought to be. With regard to his own
power, his friends and his country the ideal of such a man would be to
win the greatest power and honour by rendering the greatest
services. And this end is not attained if a man gets riches for
himself, his supporters and his country, by forming plots and
getting together conspirators, being all the while a poor creature,
not master of himself, overcome by the cowardice which fears to
fight against pleasures; nor is it attained if he goes on to kill
the men of substance, whom he speaks of as the enemy, and to plunder
their possessions, and invites his confederates and supporters to do
the same, with the object that no one shall say that it is his
fault, if he complains of being poor. The same is true if anyone
renders services of this kind to the State and receives honours from
her for distributing by decrees the property of the few among the
many-or if, being in charge the affairs of a great State which rules
over many small ones, he unjustly appropriates to his own State the
possessions of the small ones. For neither a Dion nor any other man
will, with his eyes open, make his way by steps like these to a
power which will be fraught with destruction to himself and his
descendants for all time; but he will advance towards constitutional
government and the framing of the justest and best laws, reaching
these ends without executions and murders even on the smallest scale.

  This course Dion actually followed, thinking it preferable to suffer
iniquitous deeds rather than to do them; but, while taking precautions
against them, he nevertheless, when he had reached the climax of
victory over his enemies, took a false step and fell, a catastrophe
not at all surprising. For a man of piety, temperance and wisdom, when
dealing with the impious, would not be entirely blind to the character
of such men, but it would perhaps not be surprising if he suffered the
catastrophe that might befall a good ship's captain, who would not
be entirely unaware of the approach of a storm, but might be unaware
of its extraordinary and startling violence, and might therefore be
overwhelmed by its force. The same thing caused Dion's downfall. For
he was not unaware that his assailants were thoroughly bad men, but he
was unaware how high a pitch of infatuation and of general
wickedness and greed they had reached. This was the cause of his
downfall, which has involved Sicily in countless sorrows.

  As to the steps which should be taken after the events which I
have now related, my advice has been given pretty fully and may be
regarded as finished; and if you ask my reasons for recounting the
story of my second journey to Sicily, it seemed to me essential that
an account of it must be given because of the strange and
paradoxical character of the incidents. If in this present account
of them they appear to anyone more intelligible, and seem to anyone to
show sufficient grounds in view of the circumstances, the present
statement is adequate and not too lengthy.

                            -THE END-
.
                                     360 BC

                                    PHILEBUS

                                    by Plato

                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
PHILEBUS

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES; PROTARCHUS; PHILEBUS.

  Socrates. Observe, Protarchus, the nature of the position which
you are now going to take from Philebus, and what the other position
is which I maintain, and which, if you do not approve of it, is to
be controverted by you. Shall you and I sum up the two sides?

  Protarchus. By all means.

  Soc. Philebus was saying that enjoyment and pleasure and delight,
and the class of feelings akin to them, are a good to every living
being, whereas I contend, that not these, but wisdom and
intelligence and memory, and their kindred, right opinion and true
reasoning, are better and more desirable than pleasure for all who are
able to partake of them, and that to all such who are or ever will
be they are the most advantageous of all things. Have I not given,
Philebus, a fair statement of the two sides of the argument?

  Philebus Nothing could be fairer, Socrates.

  Soc. And do you, the position which is assigned to you?

  Pro. I cannot do otherwise, since our excellent Philebus has left
the field.

  Soc. Surely the truth about these matters ought, by all means, to be
ascertained.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Shall we further agree-

  Pro. To what?

  Soc. That you and I must now try to indicate some state and
disposition of the soul, which has the property of making all men
happy.

  Pro. Yes, by all means.

  Soc. And you say that pleasure and I say that wisdom, is such a
state?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And what if there be a third state, which is better than
either? Then both of us are vanquished-are we not? But if this life,
which really has the power of making men happy, turn out to be more
akin to pleasure than to wisdom, the life of pleasure may still have
the advantage over the life of wisdom.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Or suppose that the better life is more nearly allied to
wisdom, then wisdom conquers, and pleasure is defeated;-do you agree?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And what do you say, Philebus?

  Phi. I say; and shall always say, that pleasure is easily the
conqueror; but you must decide for yourself, Protarchus.

  Pro. You, Philebus, have handed over the argument to me, and have no
longer a voice in the matter?

  Phi. True enough. Nevertheless I would dear myself and deliver my
soul of you; and I call the goddess herself to witness that I now do
so.

  Pro. You may appeal to us; we too be the witnesses of your words.
And now, Socrates, whether Philebus is pleased or displeased, we
will proceed with the argument.

  Soc. Then let us begin with the goddess herself, of whom Philebus
says that she is called Aphrodite, but that her real name is Pleasure.

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. The awe which I always feel, Protarchus, about the names of the
gods is more than human-it exceeds all other fears. And now I would
not sin against Aphrodite by naming her amiss; let her be called
what she pleases. But Pleasure I know to be manifold, and with her, as
I was just now saying, we must begin, and consider what her nature is.
She has one name, and therefore you would imagine that she is one; and
yet surely she takes the most varied and even unlike forms. For do
we not say that the intemperate has pleasure, and that the temperate
has pleasure in his very temperance-that the fool is pleased when he
is full of foolish fancies and hopes, and that the wise man has
pleasure in his wisdom? and how foolish would any one be who
affirmed that all these opposite pleasures are severally alike!

  Pro. Why, Socrates, they are opposed in so far as they spring from
opposite sources, but they are not in themselves opposite. For must
not pleasure be of all things most absolutely like pleasure-that is,
like himself?

  Soc. Yes, my good friend, just as colour is like colour;-in so far
as colours are colours, there is no difference between them; and yet
we all know that black is not only unlike, but even absolutely opposed
to white: or again, as figure is like figure, for all figures are
comprehended under one class; and yet particular figures may be
absolutely opposed to one another, and there is an infinite
diversity of them. And we might find similar examples in many other
things; therefore do not rely upon this argument, which would go to
prove the unity of the most extreme opposites. And I suspect that we
shall find a similar opposition among pleasures.

  Pro. Very likely; but how will this invalidate the argument?

  Soc. Why, I shall reply, that dissimilar as they are, you apply to
them a now predicate, for you say that all pleasant things are good;
now although no one can argue that pleasure is not pleasure, he may
argue, as we are doing, that pleasures are oftener bad than good;
but you call them all good, and at the same time are compelled, if you
are pressed, to acknowledge that they are unlike. And so you must tell
us what is the identical quality existing alike in good and bad
pleasures, which makes. you designate all of them as good.

  Pro. What do you mean, Socrates? Do you think that any one who
asserts pleasure to be the good, will tolerate the notion that some
Pleasures are good and others bad?

  Soc. And yet you will acknowledge that they are different from one
another, and sometimes opposed?

  Pro. Not in so far as they are pleasures.

  Soc. That is a return to the old position, Protarchus, and so we are
to say (are we?) that there is no difference in pleasures, but that
they are all alike; and the examples which have just been cited do not
pierce our dull minds, but we go on arguing all the same, like the
weakest and most inexperienced reasoners?

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. Why, I mean to say, that in self-defence I may, if I like,
follow your example, and assert boldly that the two things most unlike
are most absolutely alike; and the result will be that you and I
will prove ourselves to be very tyros in the art of disputing; and the
argument will be blown away and lost. Suppose that we put back, and
return to the old position; then perhaps we may come to an
understanding with one another.

  Pro. How do you mean?

  Soc. Shall I, Protarchus, have my own question asked of me by you?

  Pro. What question?

  Soc. Ask me whether wisdom and science and mind, and those other
qualities which I, when asked by you at first what is the nature of
the good, affirmed to be good, are not in the same case with the
pleasures of which you spoke.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. The sciences are a numerous class, and will be found to present
great differences. But even admitting that, like the pleasures, they
are opposite as well as different, should I be worthy of the name of
dialectician if, in order to avoid this difficulty, I were to say
(as you are saying of pleasure) that there is no difference between
one science and another;-would not the argument founder and
disappear like an idle tale, although we might ourselves escape
drowning by clinging to a fallacy?

  Pro. May none of this befall us, except the deliverance! Yet I
like the even-handed justice which is applied to both our arguments.
Let us assume, then, that there are many and diverse pleasures, and
many and different sciences.

  Soc. And let us have no concealment, Protarchus, of the
differences between my good and yours; but let us bring them to the
light in the hope that, in the process of testing them, they may
show whether pleasure is to be called the good, or wisdom, or some
third quality; for surely we are not now simply contending in order
that my view or that yours may prevail, but I presume that we ought
both of us to be fighting for the truth.

  Pro. Certainly we ought.

  Soc. Then let us have a more definite understanding and establish
the principle on which the argument rests.

  Pro. What principle?

  Soc. A principle about which all men are always in a difficulty, and
some men sometimes against their will.

  Pro. Speak plainer.

  Soc. The principle which has just turned up, which is a marvel of
nature; for that one should be many or many one, are wonderful
propositions; and he who affirms either is very open to attack.

  Pro. Do you mean, when a person says that I, Protarchus, am by
nature one and also many, dividing the single "me" into many "mens,"
and even opposing them as great and small, light and heavy, and in ten
thousand other ways?

  Soc. Those, Protarchus, are the common and acknowledged paradoxes
about the one and many, which I may say that everybody has by this
time agreed to dismiss as childish and obvious and detrimental to
the true course of thought; and no more favour is shown to that
other puzzle, in which a person proves the members and parts of
anything to be divided, and then confessing that they are all one,
says laughingly in disproof of his own words: Why, here is a
miracle, the one is many and infinite, and the many are only one.

  Pro. But what, Socrates, are those other marvels connected with this
subject which, as you imply, have not yet become common and
acknowledged?

  Soc. When, my boy, the one does not belong to the class of things
that are born and perish, as in the instances which we were giving,
for in those cases, and when unity is of this concrete nature, there
is, as I was saying, a universal consent that no refutation is needed;
but when the assertion is made that man is one, or ox is one, or
beauty one, or the good one, then the interest which attaches to these
and similar unities and the attempt which is made to divide them gives
birth to a controversy.

  Pro. Of what nature?

  Soc. In the first place, as to whether these unities have a real
existence; and then how each individual unity, being always the
same, and incapable either of generation of destruction, but retaining
a permanent individuality, can be conceived either as dispersed and
multiplied in the infinity of the world of generation, or as still
entire and yet divided from itself, which latter would seem to be
the greatest impossibility of all, for how can one and the same
thing be at the same time in one and in many things? These,
Protarchus, are the real difficulties, and this is the one and many to
which they relate; they are the source of great perplexity if ill
decided, and the right determination of them is very helpful.

  Pro. Then, Socrates, let us begin by clearing up these questions.

  Soc. That is what I should wish.

  Pro. And I am sure that all my other friends will be glad to hear
them discussed; Philebus, fortunately for us, is not disposed to move,
and we had better not stir him up with questions.

  Soc. Good; and where shall we begin this great and multifarious
battle, in which such various points are at issue? Shall begin thus?

  Pro. How?

  Soc. We say that the one and many become identified by thought,
and that now, as in time past, they run about together, in and out
of every word which is uttered, and that this union of them will never
cease, and is not now beginning, but is, as I believe, an
everlasting quality of thought itself, which never grows old. Any
young man, when he first tastes these subtleties, is delighted, and
fancies that he has found a treasure of wisdom; in the first
enthusiasm of his joy he leaves no stone, or rather no thought
unturned, now rolling up the many into the one, and kneading them
together, now unfolding and dividing them; he puzzles himself first
and above all, and then he proceeds to puzzle his neighbours,
whether they are older or younger, or of his own age-that makes no
difference; neither father nor mother does he spare; no human being
who has ears is safe from him, hardly even his dog, and a barbarian
would have no chance of escaping him, if an interpreter could only
be found.

  Pro. Considering, Socrates, how many we are, and that all of us
are young men, is there not a danger that we and Philebus may all
set upon you, if you abuse us? We understand what you mean; but is
there no charm by which we may dispel all this confusion, no more
excellent way of arriving at the truth? If there is, we hope that
you will guide us into that way, and we will do our best to follow,
for the enquiry in which we are engaged, Socrates, is not unimportant.

  Soc. The reverse of unimportant, my boys, as Philebus calls you, and
there neither is nor ever will be a better than my own favourite
way, which has nevertheless already often deserted me and left me
helpless in the hour of need.

  Pro. Tell us what that is.

  Soc. One which may be easily pointed out, but is by no means easy of
application; it is the parent of all the discoveries in the arts.

  Pro. Tell us what it is.

  Soc. A gift of heaven, which, as I conceive, the gods tossed among
men by the hands of a new Prometheus, and therewith a blaze of
light; and the ancients, who were our betters and nearer the gods than
we are, handed down the tradition, that whatever things are said to be
are composed of one and many, and have the finite, and infinite
implanted in them: seeing, then, that such is the order of the
world, we too ought in every enquiry to begin by laying down one
idea of that which is the subject of enquiry; this unity we shall find
in everything. Having found it, we may next proceed to look for two,
if there be two, or, if not, then for three or some other number,
subdividing each of these units, until at last the unity with which we
began is seen not only to be one and many and infinite, but also a
definite number; the infinite must not be suffered to approach the
many until the entire number of the species intermediate between unity
and infinity has been discovered-then, and not till then, we may, rest
from division, and without further troubling ourselves about the
endless individuals may allow them to drop into infinity. This, as I
was saying, is the way of considering and learning and teaching one
another, which the gods have handed down to us. But the wise men of
our time are either too quick or too slow, in conceiving plurality
in unity. Having no method, they make their one and many anyhow, and
from unity pass at once to infinity; the intermediate steps never
occur to them. And this, I repeat, is what makes the difference
between the mere art of disputation and true dialectic.

  Pro. I think that I partly understand you Socrates, but I should
like to have a clearer notion of what you are saying.

  Soc. I may illustrate my meaning by the letters of the alphabet,
Protarchus, which you were made to learn as a child.

  Pro. How do they afford an illustration?

  Soc. The sound which passes through the lips whether of an
individual or of all men is one and yet infinite.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And yet not by knowing either that sound is one or that sound
is infinite are we perfect in the art of speech, but the knowledge
of the number and nature of sounds is what makes a man a grammarian.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And the knowledge which makes a man a musician is of the same
kind.

  Pro. How so?

  Soc. Sound is one in music as well as in grammar?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And there is a higher note and a lower note, and a note of
equal pitch:-may we affirm so much?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. But you would not be a real musician if this was all that you
knew; though if you did not know this you would know almost nothing of
music.

  Pro. Nothing.

  Soc. But when you have learned what sounds are high and what low,
and the number and nature of the intervals and their limits or
proportions, and the systems compounded out of them, which our fathers
discovered, and have handed down to us who are their descendants under
the name of harmonies; and the affections corresponding to them in the
movements of the human body, which when measured by numbers ought,
as they say, to be called rhythms and measures; and they tell us
that the same principle should be applied to every one and many;-when,
I say, you have learned all this, then, my dear friend, you are
perfect; and you may be said to understand any other subject, when you
have a similar grasp of it. But the, infinity of kinds and the
infinity of individuals which there is in each of them, when not
classified, creates in every one of us a state of infinite
ignorance; and he who never looks for number in anything, will not
himself be looked for in the number of famous men.

  Pro. I think that what Socrates is now saying is excellent,
Philebus.

  Phi. I think so too, but how do his words bear upon us and upon
the argument?

  Soc. Philebus is right in asking that question of us, Protarchus.

  Pro. Indeed he is, and you must answer him.

  Soc. I will; but you must let me make one little remark first
about these matters; I was saying, that he who begins with any
individual unity, should proceed from that, not to infinity, but to
a definite number, and now I say conversely, that he who has to
begin with infinity should not jump to unity, but he should look about
for some number, representing a certain quantity, and thus out of
all end in one. And now let us return for an illustration of our
principle to the case of letters.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. Some god or divine man, who in the Egyptian legend is said to
have been Theuth, observing that the human voice was infinite, first
distinguished in this infinity a certain number of vowels, and then
other letters which had sound, but were not pure vowels (i.e., the
semivowels); these too exist in a definite number; and lastly, he
distinguished a third class of letters which we now call mutes,
without voice and without sound, and divided these, and likewise the
two other classes of vowels and semivowels, into the individual
sounds, told the number of them, and gave to each and all of them
the name of letters; and observing that none of us could learn any one
of them and not learn them all, and in consideration of this common
bond which in a manner united them, he assigned to them all a single
art, and this he called the art of grammar or letters.

  Phi. The illustration, Protarchus, has assisted me in
understanding the original statement, but I still feel the defect of
which I just now complained.

  Soc. Are you going to ask, Philebus, what this has to do with the
argument?

  Phi. Yes, that is a question which Protarchus and I have been long
asking.

  Soc. Assuredly you have already arrived at the answer to the
question which, as you say, you have been so long asking?

  Phi. How so?

  Soc. Did we not begin by enquiring into the comparative
eligibility of pleasure and wisdom?

  Phi. Certainly.

  Soc. And we maintain that they are each of them one?

  Phi. True.

  Soc. And the precise question to which the previous discussion
desires an answer is, how they are one and also many [i.e., how they
have one genus and many species], and are not at once infinite, and
what number of species is to be assigned to either of them before they
pass into infinity.

  Pro. That is a very serious question, Philebus, to which Socrates
has ingeniously brought us round, and please to consider which of us
shall answer him; there may be something ridiculous in my being unable
to answer, and therefore imposing the task upon you, when I have
undertaken the whole charge of the argument, but if neither of us were
able to answer, the result methinks would be still more ridiculous.
Let us consider, then, what we are to do:-Socrates, if I understood
him rightly, is asking whether there are not kinds of pleasure, and
what is the number and nature of them, and the same of wisdom.

  Soc. Most true, O son of Callias; and the previous argument showed
that if we are not able to tell the kinds of everything that has
unity, likeness, sameness, or their opposites, none of us will be of
the smallest use in any enquiry.

  Pro. That seems to be very near the truth, Socrates. Happy would the
wise man be if he knew all things, and the next best thing for him
is that he should know himself. Why do I say so at this moment? I will
tell you. You, Socrates, have granted us this opportunity of
conversing with you, and are ready to assist us in determining what is
the best of human goods. For when Philebus said that pleasure and
delight and enjoyment and the like were the chief good, you
answered-No, not those, but another class of goods; and we are
constantly reminding ourselves of what you said, and very properly, in
order that we may not forget to examine and compare the two. And these
goods, which in your opinion are to be designated as superior to
pleasure, and are the true objects of pursuit, are mind and
knowledge and understanding and art and the like. There was a
dispute about which were the best, and we playfully threatened that
you should not be allowed to go home until the question was settled;
and you agreed, and placed yourself at our disposal. And now, as
children say, what has been fairly given cannot be taken back; cease
then to fight against us in this way.

  Soc. In what way?

  Phi. Do not perplex us, and keep asking questions of us to which
we have not as yet any sufficient answer to give; let us not imagine
that a general puzzling of us all is to be the end of our
discussion, but if we are unable to answer, do you answer, as you have
promised. Consider, then, whether you will divide pleasure and
knowledge according to their kinds; or you may let the matter drop, if
you are able and willing to find some other mode of clearing up our
controversy.

  Soc. If you say that, I have nothing to apprehend, for the words "if
you are willing" dispel all my fear; and, moreover, a god seems to
have recalled something to my mind.

  Phi. What is that?

  Soc. I remember to have heard long ago certain discussions about
pleasure and wisdom, whether awake or in a dream I cannot tell; they
were to the effect that neither the one nor the other of them was
the good, but some third thing, which was different from them, and
better than either. If this be clearly established, then pleasure will
lose the victory, for the good will cease to be identified with
her:-Am I not right?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And there will cease to be any need of distinguishing the kinds
of pleasures, as I am inclined to think, but this will appear more
clearly as we proceed.

  Pro. Capital, Socrates; pray go on as you propose.

  Soc. But, let us first agree on some little points.

  Pro. What are they?

  Soc. Is the good perfect or imperfect?

  Pro. The most perfect, Socrates, of all things.

  Soc. And is the good sufficient?

  Pro. Yes, certainly, and in a degree surpassing all other things.

  Soc. And no one can deny that all percipient beings desire and
hunt after good, and are eager to catch and have the good about
them, and care not for the attainment of anything which its not
accompanied by good.

  Pro. That is undeniable.

  Soc. Now let us part off the life of pleasure from the life of
wisdom, and pass them in review.

  Pro. How do you mean?

  Soc. Let there be no wisdom in the life of pleasure, nor any
pleasure in the life of wisdom, for if either of them is the chief
good, it cannot be supposed to want anything, but if either is shown
to want anything, then it cannot really be the chief good.

  Pro. Impossible.

  Soc. And will you help us to test these two lives?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Then answer.

  Pro. Ask.

  Soc. Would you choose, Protarchus, to live all your life long in the
enjoyment of the greatest pleasures?

  Pro. Certainly I should.

  Soc. Would you consider that there was still anything wanting to you
if you had perfect pleasure?

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. Reflect; would you not want wisdom and intelligence and
forethought, and similar qualities? would you not at any rate want
sight?

  Pro. Why should I? Having pleasure I should have all things.

  Soc. Living thus, you would always throughout your life enjoy the
greatest pleasures?

  Pro. I should.

  Soc. But if you had neither mind, nor memory, nor knowledge, nor
true opinion, you would in the first place be utterly ignorant of
whether you were pleased or not, because you would be entirely
devoid of intelligence.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And similarly, if you had no memory you would not recollect
that you had ever been pleased, nor would the slightest recollection
of the pleasure which you feel at any moment remain with you; and if
you had no true opinion you would not think that you were pleased when
you were; and if you had no power of calculation you would not be able
to calculate on future pleasure, and your life would be the life,
not of a man, but of an oyster or pulmo marinus. Could this be
otherwise?

  Pro. No.

  Soc. But is such a life eligible?

  Pro. I cannot answer you, Socrates; the argument has taken away from
me the power of speech.

  Soc. We must keep up our spirits;-let us now take the life of mind
and examine it in turn.

  Pro. And what is this life of mind?

  Soc. I want to know whether any one of us would consent to live,
having wisdom and mind and knowledge and memory of all things, but
having no sense of pleasure or pain, and wholly unaffected by these
and the like feelings?

  Pro. Neither life, Socrates, appears eligible to me, or is likely,
as I should imagine, to be chosen by any one else.

  Soc. What would you say, Protarchus, to both of these in one, or
to one that was made out of the union of the two?

  Pro. Out of the union, that is, of pleasure with mind and wisdom?

  Soc. Yes, that is the life which I mean.

  Pro. There can be no difference of opinion; not some but all would
surely choose this third rather than either of the other two, and in
addition to them.

  Soc. But do you see the consequence?

  Pro. To be sure I do. The consequence is, that two out of the
three lives which have been proposed are neither sufficient nor
eligible for man or for animal.

  Soc. Then now there can be no doubt that neither of them has the
good, for the one which had would certainly have been sufficient and
perfect and eligible for every living creature or thing that was
able to live such a life; and if any of us had chosen any other, he
would have chosen contrary to the nature of the truly eligible, and
not of his own free will, but either through ignorance or from some
unhappy necessity.

  Pro. Certainly that seems to be true.

  Soc. And now have I not sufficiently shown that Philebus, goddess is
not to be regarded as identical with the good?

  Phi. Neither is your "mind" the good, Socrates, for that will be
open to the same objections.

  Soc. Perhaps, Philebus, you may be right in saying so of my
"mind"; but of the true, which is also the divine mind, far otherwise.
However, I will not at present claim the first place for mind as
against the mixed life; but we must come to some understanding about
the second place. For you might affirm pleasure and I mind to be the
cause of the mixed life; and in that case although neither of them
would be the good, one of them might be imagined to be the cause of
the good. And I might proceed further to argue in opposition to
Phoebus, that the element which makes this mixed life eligible and
good, is more akin and more similar to mind than to pleasure. And if
this is true, pleasure cannot be truly said to share either in the
first or second place, and does not, if I may trust my own mind,
attain even to the third.

  Pro. Truly, Socrates, pleasure appears to me to have had a fall;
in fighting for the palm, she has been smitten by the argument, and is
laid low. I must say that mind would have fallen too, and may
therefore be thought to show discretion in not putting forward a
similar claim. And if pleasure were deprived not only of the first but
of the second place, she would be terribly damaged in the eyes of
her admirers, for not even to them would she still appear as fair as
before.

  Soc. Well, but had we not better leave her now, and not pain her
by applying the crucial test, and finally detecting her?

  Pro. Nonsense, Socrates.

  Soc. Why? because I said that we had better not pain pleasure, which
is an impossibility?

  Pro. Yes, and more than that, because you do not seem to be aware
that none of us will let you go home until you have finished the
argument.

  Soc. Heavens! Protarchus, that will be a tedious business, and
just at present not at all an easy one. For in going to war in the
cause of mind, who is aspiring to the second prize, I ought to have
weapons of another make from those which I used before; some, however,
of the old ones may do again. And must I then finish the argument?

  Pro. Of course you must.

  Soc. Let us be very careful in laying the foundation.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. Let us divide all existing things into two, or rather, if you
do not object, into three classes.

  Pro. Upon what principle would you make the division?

  Soc. Let us take some of our newly-found notions.

  Pro. Which of them?

  Soc. Were we not saying that God revealed a finite element of
existence, and also an infinite?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Let us assume these two principles, and also a third, which
is compounded out of them; but I fear that am ridiculously clumsy at
these processes of division and enumeration.

  Pro. What do you mean, my good friend?

  Soc. I say that a fourth class is still wanted.

  Pro. What will that be?

  Soc. Find the cause of the third or compound, and add this as a
fourth class to the three others.

  Pro. And would you like to have a fifth dass or cause of
resolution as well as a cause of composition?

  Soc. Not, I think, at present; but if I want a fifth at some
future time you shall allow me to have it.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Let us begin with the first three; and as we find two out of
the three greatly divided and dispersed, let us endeavour to reunite
them, and see how in each of them there is a one and many.

  Pro. If you would explain to me a little more about them, perhaps
I might be able to follow you.

  Soc. Well, the two classes are the same which I mentioned before,
one the finite, and the other the infinite; I will first show that the
infinite is in a certain sense many, and the finite may be hereafter
discussed.

  Pro. I agree.

  Soc. And now consider well; for the question to which I invite
your attention is difficult and controverted. When you speak of hotter
and colder, can you conceive any limit in those qualities? Does not
the more and less, which dwells in their very nature, prevent their
having any end? for if they had an end, the more and less would
themselves have an end.

  Pro. That is most true.

  Soc. Ever, as we say, into the hotter and the colder there enters
a more and a less.

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. Then, says the argument, there is never any end of them, and
being endless they must also be infinite.

  Pro. Yes, Socrates, that is exceedingly true.

  Soc. Yes, my dear Protarchus, and your answer reminds me that such
an expression as "exceedingly," which you have just uttered, and
also the term "gently," have the same significance as more or less;
for whenever they occur they do not allow of the existence of
quantity-they are always introducing degrees into actions, instituting
a comparison of a more or a less excessive or a more or a less gentle,
and at each creation of more or less, quantity disappears. For, as I
was just now saying, if quantity and measure did not disappear, but
were allowed to intrude in the sphere of more and less and the other
comparatives, these last would be driven out of their own domain. When
definite quantity is once admitted, there can be no longer a
"hotter" or a "colder" (for these are always progressing, and are
never in one stay); but definite quantity is at rest, and has ceased
to progress. Which proves that comparatives, such as the hotter, and
the colder, are to be ranked in the class of the infinite.

  Pro. Your remark certainly, has the look of truth, Socrates; but
these subjects, as you were saying, are difficult to follow at
first. I think however, that if I could hear the argument repeated
by you once or twice, there would be a substantial agreement between
us.

  Soc. Yes, and I will try to meet your wish; but, as I would rather
not waste time in the enumeration of endless particulars, let me
know whether I may not assume as a note of the infinite-

  Pro. What?

  Soc. I want to know whether such things as appear to us to admit
of more or less, or are denoted by the words "exceedingly,"
"gently," "extremely," and the like, may not be referred to the
class of the infinite, which is their unity, for, as was asserted in
the previous argument, all things that were divided and dispersed
should be brought together, and have the mark or seal of some one
nature, if possible, set upon them-do you remember?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And all things which do not admit of more or less, but admit
their opposites, that is to say, first of all, equality, and the
equal, or again, the double, or any other ratio of number and
measure-all these may, I think, be rightly reckoned by us in the class
of the limited or finite; what do you say?

  Pro. Excellent, Socrates.

  Soc. And now what nature shall we ascribe to the third or compound
kind?

  Pro. You, I think, will have to tell me that.

  Soc. Rather God will tell you, if there be any God who will listen
to my prayers.

  Pro. Offer up a prayer, then, and think.

  Soc. I am thinking, Protarchus, and I believe that some God has
befriended us.

  Pro. What do you mean, and what proof have you to offer of what
you are saying?

  Soc. I will tell you, and do you listen to my words.

  Pro. Proceed.

  Soc. Were we not speaking just now of hotter and colder?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Add to them drier, wetter, more, less, swifter, slower,
greater, smaller, and all that in the preceding argument we placed
under the unity of more and less.

  Pro. In the class of the infinite, you mean?

  Soc. Yes; and now mingle this with the other.

  Pro. What is the other.

  Soc. The class of the finite which we ought to have brought together
as we did the infinite; but, perhaps, it will come to the same thing
if we do so now;-when the two are combined, a third will appear.

  Pro. What do you mean by the class of the finite?

  Soc. The class of the equal and the double, and any class which puts
an end to difference and opposition, and by introducing number creates
harmony and proportion among the different elements.

  Pro. I understand; you seem to me to mean that the various
opposites, when you mingle with them the class of the finite, takes
certain forms.

  Soc. Yes, that is my meaning.

  Pro. Proceed.

  Soc. Does not the right participation in the finite give health-in
disease, for instance?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And whereas the high and low, the swift and the slow are
infinite or unlimited, does not the addition of the principles
aforesaid introduce a limit, and perfect the whole frame of music?

  Pro. Yes, certainly.

  Soc. Or, again, when cold and heat prevail, does not the
introduction of them take away excess and indefiniteness, and infuse
moderation and harmony?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And from a like admixture of the finite and infinite come the
seasons, and all the delights of life?

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. I omit ten thousand other things, such as beauty and health and
strength, and the many beauties and high perfections of the soul: O my
beautiful Philebus, the goddess, methinks, seeing the universal
wantonness and wickedness of all things, and that there was in them no
limit to pleasures and self-indulgence, devised the limit of law and
order, whereby, as you say, Philebus, she torments, or as I
maintain, delivers the soul-What think you, Protarchus?

  Pro. Her ways are much to my mind, Socrates.

  Soc. You will observe that I have spoken of three classes?

  Pro. Yes, I think that I understand you: you mean to say that the
infinite is one class, and that the finite is a second class of
existences; but what you would make the third I am not so certain.

  Soc. That is because the amazing variety of the third class is too
much for you, my dear friend; but there was not this difficulty with
the infinite, which also comprehended many classes, for all of them
were sealed with the note of more and less, and therefore appeared
one.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And the finite or limit had not many divisions, and we ready
acknowledged it to be by nature one?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. Yes, indeed; and when I speak of the third class, understand me
to mean any offspring of these, being a birth into true being,
effected by the measure which the limit introduces.

  Pro. I understand.

  Soc. Still there was, as we said, a fourth class to be investigated,
and you must assist in the investigation; for does not everything
which comes into being, of necessity come into being through a cause?

  Pro. Yes, certainly; for how can there be anything which has no
cause?

  Soc. And is not the agent the same as the cause in all except
name; the agent and the cause may be rightly called one?

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And the same may be said of the patient, or effect; we shall
find that they too differ, as I was saying, only in name-shall we not?

  Pro. We shall.

  Soc. The agent or cause always naturally leads, and the patient or
effect naturally follows it?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Then the cause and what is subordinate to it in generation
are not the same, but different?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Did not the things which were generated, and the things out
of which they were generated, furnish all the three classes?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And the creator or cause of them has been satisfactorily proven
to be distinct from them-and may therefore be called a fourth
principle?

  Pro. So let us call it.

  Soc. Quite right; but now, having distinguished the four, I think
that we had better refresh our memories by recapitulating each of them
in order.

  Pro. By all means.

  Soc. Then the first I will call the infinite or unlimited, and the
second the finite or limited; then follows the third, an essence
compound and generated; and I do not think that I shall be far wrong
in speaking of the cause of mixture and generation as the fourth.

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. And now what is the next question, and how came we hither? Were
we not enquiring whether the second place belonged to pleasure or
wisdom?

  Pro. We were.

  Soc. And now, having determined these points, shall we not be better
able to decide about the first and second place, which was the
original subject of dispute?

  Pro. I dare say.

  Soc. We said, if you remember, that the mixed life of pleasure and
wisdom was the conqueror-did we not?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And we see what is the place and nature of this life and to
what class it is to be assigned?

  Pro. Beyond a doubt.

  Soc. This is evidently comprehended in the third or mixed class;
which is not composed of any two particular ingredients, but of all
the elements of infinity, bound down by the finite, and may
therefore be truly said to comprehend the conqueror life.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. And what shall we say, Philebus, of your life which is all
sweetness; and in which of the aforesaid classes is that to be placed?
Perhaps you will allow me to ask you a question before you answer?

  Phi. Let me hear.

  Soc. Have pleasure and pain a limit, or do they belong to the
class which admits of more and less?

  Phi. They belong to the class which admits of more, Socrates; for
pleasure would not be perfectly good if she were not infinite in
quantity and degree.

  Soc. Nor would pain, Philebus, be perfectly evil. And therefore
the infinite cannot be that element which imparts to pleasure some
degree of good. But now-admitting, if you like, that pleasure is of
the nature of the infinite-in which of the aforesaid classes, O
Protarchus and Philebus, can we without irreverence place wisdom and
knowledge and mind? And let us be careful, for I think that the danger
will be very serious if we err on this point.

  Phi. You magnify, Socrates, the importance of your favourite god.

  Soc. And you, my friend, are also magnifying your favourite goddess;
but still I must beg you to answer the question.

  Pro. Socrates is quite right, Philebus, and we must submit to him.

  Phi. And did not you, Protarchus, propose to answer in my place?

  Pro. Certainly I did; but I am now in a great strait, and I must
entreat you, Socrates, to be our spokesman, and then we shall not
say anything wrong or disrespectful of your favourite.

  Soc. I must obey you, Protarchus; nor is the task which you impose a
difficult one; but did I really, as Philebus implies, disconcert you
with my playful solemnity, when I asked the question to what class
mind and knowledge belong?

  Pro. You did, indeed, Socrates.

  Soc. Yet the answer is easy, since all philosophers assert with
one voice that mind is the king of heaven and earth-in reality they
are magnifying themselves. And perhaps they are right. But still I
should like to consider the class of mind, if you do not object, a
little more fully.

  Phi. Take your own course, Socrates, and never mind length; we shall
not tire of you.

  Soc. Very good; let us begin then, Protarchus, by asking a question.

  Pro. What question?

  Soc. Whether all this which they call the universe is left to the
guidance of unreason and chance medley, or, on the contrary, as our
fathers have declared, ordered and governed by a marvellous
intelligence and wisdom.

  Pro. Wide asunder are the two assertions, illustrious Socrates,
for that which you were just now saying to me appears to be blasphemy;
but the other assertion, that mind orders all things, is worthy of the
aspect of the world, and of the sun, and of the moon, and of the stars
and of the whole circle of the heavens; and never will I say or
think otherwise.

  Soc. Shall we then agree with them of old time in maintaining this
doctrine-not merely reasserting the notions of others, without risk to
ourselves,-but shall we share in the danger, and take our part of
the reproach which will await us, when an ingenious individual
declares that all is disorder?

  Pro. That would certainly be my wish.

  Soc. Then now please to consider the next stage of the argument.

  Pro. Let me hear.

  Soc. We see that the elements which enter into the nature of the
bodies of all animals, fire, water, air, and, as the storm-tossed
sailor cries, "land" [i.e., earth], reappear in the constitution of
the world.

  Pro. The proverb may be applied to us; for truly the storm gathers
over us, and we are at our wit's end.

  Soc. There is something to be remarked about each of these elements.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. Only a small fraction of any one of them exists in us, and that
of a mean sort, and not in any way pure, or having any power worthy of
its nature. One instance will prove this of all of them; there is fire
within us, and in the universe.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And is not our fire small and weak and mean? But the fire in
the universe is wonderful in quantity and beauty, and in every power
that fire has.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. And is the fire in the universe nourished and generated and
ruled by the fire in us, or is the fire in you and me, and in other
animals, dependent on the universal fire?

  Pro. That is a question which does not deserve an answer.

  Soc. Right; and you would say the same, if I am not mistaken, of the
earth which is in animals and the earth which is in the universe,
and you would give a similar reply about all the other elements?

  Pro. Why, how could any man who gave any other be deemed in his
senses?

  Soc. I do not think that he could-but now go on to the next step.
When we saw those elements of which we have been speaking gathered
up in one, did we not call them a body?

  Pro. We did.

  Soc. And the same may be said of the cosmos, which for the same
reason may be considered to be a body, because made up of the same
elements.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. But is our body nourished wholly by this body, or is this
body nourished by our body, thence deriving and having the qualities
of which we were just now speaking?

  Pro. That again, Socrates, is a question which does not deserve to
be asked.

  Soc. Well, tell me, is this question worth asking?

  Pro. What question?

  Soc. May our body be said to have a soul?

  Pro. Clearly.

  Soc. And whence comes that soul, my dear Protarchus, unless the body
of the universe, which contains elements like those in our bodies
but in every way fairer, had also a soul? Can there be another source?

  Pro. Clearly, Socrates, that is the only source.

  Soc. Why, yes, Protarchus; for surely we cannot imagine that of
the four classes, the finite, the infinite, the composition of the
two, and the cause, the fourth, which enters into all things, giving
to our bodies souls, and the art of self-management, and of healing
disease, and operating in other ways to heal and organize, having
too all the attributes of wisdom;-we cannot, I say, imagine that
whereas the self-same elements exist, both in the entire heaven and in
great provinces of the heaven, only fairer and purer, this last should
not also in that higher sphere have designed the noblest and fairest
things?

  Pro. Such a supposition is quite unreasonable.

  Soc. Then if this be denied, should we not be wise in adopting the
other view and maintaining that there is in the universe a mighty
infinite and an adequate limit, of which we have often spoken, as well
as a presiding cause of no mean power, which orders and arranges years
and seasons and months, and may be justly called wisdom and mind?

  Pro. Most justly.

  Soc. And wisdom and mind cannot exist without soul?

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. And in the divine nature of Zeus would you not say that there
is the soul and mind of a king, because there is in him the power of
the cause? And other gods have other attributes, by which they are
pleased to be called.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. Do not then suppose that these words are rashly spoken by us, O
Protarchus, for they are in harmony with the testimony of those who
said of old time that mind rules the universe.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And they furnish an answer to my enquiry; for they imply that
mind is the parent of that class of the four which we called the cause
of all; and I think that you now have my answer.

  Pro. I have indeed, and yet I did not observe that you had answered.

  Soc. A jest is sometimes refreshing, Protarchus, when it
interrupts earnest.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. I think, friend, that we have now pretty clearly set forth
the class to which mind belongs and what is the power of mind.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And the class to which pleasure belongs has also been long
ago discovered?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And let us remember, too, of both of them, (1) that mind was
akin to the cause and of this family; and (2) that pleasure is
infinite and belongs to the class which neither has, nor ever will
have in itself, a beginning, middle, or end of its own.

  Pro. I shall be sure to remember.

  Soc. We must next examine what is their place and under what
conditions they are generated. And we will begin with pleasure,
since her class was first examined; and yet pleasure cannot be rightly
tested apart from pain ever

  Pro. If this is the road, let us take it.

  Soc. I wonder whether you would agree with me about the origin of
pleasure and pain.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. I mean to say that their natural seat is in the mixed class.

  Pro. And would you tell me again, sweet Socrates, which of the
aforesaid classes is the mixed one?

  Soc. I will my fine fellow, to the best of my ability.

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. Let us then understand the mixed class to be that which we
placed third in the list of four.

  Pro. That which followed the infinite and the finite; and in which
you ranked health, and, if I am not mistaken, harmony.

  Soc. Capital; and now will you please to give me your best
attention?

  Pro. Proceed; I am attending.

  Soc. I say that when the harmony in animals is dissolved, there is
also a dissolution of nature and a generation of pain.

  Pro. That is very probable.

  Soc. And the restoration of harmony and return to nature is the
source of pleasure, if I may be allowed to speak in the fewest and
shortest words about matters of the greatest moment.

  Pro. I believe that you are right, Socrates; but will you try to
be a little plainer?

  Soc. Do not obvious and every-day phenomena furnish the simplest
illustration?

  Pro. What phenomena do you mean?

  Soc. Hunger, for example, is a dissolution and a pain.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Whereas eating is a replenishment and a pleasure?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. Thirst again is a destruction and a pain, but the effect of
moisture replenishing the dry Place is a pleasure: once more, the
unnatural separation and dissolution caused by heat is painful, and
the natural restoration and refrigeration is pleasant.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And the unnatural freezing of the moisture in an animal is
pain, and the natural process of resolution and return of the elements
to their original state is pleasure. And would not the general
proposition seem to you to hold, that the destroying of the natural
union of the finite and infinite, which, as I was observing before,
make up the class of living beings, is pain, and that the process of
return of all things to their own nature is pleasure?

  Pro. Granted; what you say has a general truth.

  Soc. Here then is one kind of pleasures and pains originating
severally in the two processes which we have described?

  Pro. Good.

  Soc. Let us next assume that in the soul herself there is an
antecedent hope of pleasure which is sweet and refreshing, and an
expectation of pain, fearful and anxious.

  Pro. Yes; this is another class of pleasures and pains, which is
of the soul only, apart from the body, and is produced by expectation.

  Soc. Right; for in the analysis of these, pure, as I suppose them to
be, the pleasures being unalloyed with pain and the pains with
pleasure, methinks that we shall see clearly whether the whole class
of pleasure is to be desired, or whether this quality of entire
desirableness is not rather to be attributed to another of the classes
which have been mentioned; and whether pleasure and pain, like heat
and cold, and other things of the same kind, are not sometimes to be
desired and sometimes not to be desired, as being not in themselves
good, but only sometimes and in some instances admitting of the nature
of good.

  Pro. You say most truly that this is the track which the
investigation should pursue.

  Soc. Well, then, assuming that pain ensues on the dissolution, and
pleasure on the restoration of the harmony, let us now ask what will
be the condition of animated beings who are neither in process of
restoration nor of dissolution. And mind what you say: I ask whether
any animal who is in that condition can possibly have any feeling of
pleasure or pain, great or small?

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. Then here we have a third state, over and above that of
pleasure and of pain?

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And do not forget that there is such a state; it will make a
great difference in our judgment of pleasure, whether we remember this
or not. And I should like to say a few words about it.

  Pro. What have you to say?

  Soc. Why, you know that if a man chooses the life of wisdom, there
is no reason why he should not live in this neutral state.

  Pro. You mean that he may live neither rejoicing nor sorrowing?

  Soc. Yes; and if I remember rightly, when the lives were compared,
no degree of pleasure, whether great or small, was thought to be
necessary to him who chose the life of thought and wisdom.

  Pro. Yes, certainly, we said so.

  Soc. Then he will live without pleasure; and who knows whether
this may not be the most divine of all lives?

  Pro. If so, the gods, at any rate, cannot be supposed to have either
joy or sorrow.

  Soc. Certainly not-there would be a great impropriety in the
assumption of either alternative. But whether the gods are or are
not indifferent to pleasure is a point which may be considered
hereafter if in any way relevant to the argument, and whatever is
the conclusion we will place it to the account of mind in her
contest for the second place, should she have to resign the first.

  Pro. Just so.

  Soc. The other class of pleasures, which as we were saying is purely
mental, is entirely derived from memory.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. I must first of all analyse memory, or rather perception
which is prior to, memory, if the subject of our discussion is ever to
be properly cleared up.

  Pro. How will you proceed?

  Soc. Let us imagine affections of the body which are extinguished
before they reach the soul, and leave her unaffected; and again, other
affections which vibrate through both soul and body, and impart a
shock to both and to each of them.

  Pro. Granted.

  Soc. And the soul may be truly said to be oblivious of the first but
not of the second?

  Pro. Quite true.

  Soc. When I say oblivious, do not suppose that I mean
forgetfulness in a literal sense; for forgetfulness is the exit of
memory, which in this case has not yet entered; and to speak of the
loss of that which is not yet in existence, and never has been, is a
contradiction; do you see?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. Then just be so good as to change the terms.

  Pro. How shall I change them?

  Soc. Instead of the oblivion of the soul, when you are describing
the state in which she is unaffected by the shocks of the body, say
unconsciousness.

  Pro. I see.

  Soc. And the union or communion of soul and body in one feeling
and motion would be properly called consciousness?

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. Then now we know the meaning of the word?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And memory may, I think, be rightly described as the
preservation of consciousness?

  Pro. Right.

  Soc. But do we not distinguish memory from recollection?

  Pro. I think so.

  Soc. And do we not mean by recollection the power which the soul has
of recovering, when by herself, some feeling which she experienced
when in company with the body?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And when she recovers of herself the lost recollection of
some consciousness or knowledge, the recovery is termed recollection
and reminiscence?

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. There is a reason why I say all this.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. I want to attain the plainest possible notion of pleasure and
desire, as they exist in the mind only, apart from the body; and the
previous analysis helps to show the nature of both.

  Pro. Then now, Socrates, let us proceed to the next point.

  Soc. There are certainly many things to be considered in
discussing the generation and whole complexion of pleasure. At the
outset we must determine the nature and seat of desire.

  Pro. Ay; let us enquire into that, for we shall lose nothing.

  Soc. Nay, Protarchus, we shall surely lose the puzzle if we find the
answer.

  Pro. A fair retort; but let us proceed.

  Soc. Did we not place hunger, thirst, and the like, in the class
of desires?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And yet they are very different; what common nature have we
in view when we call them by a single name?

  Pro. By heavens, Socrates, that is a question which is, not easily
answered; but it must be answered.

  Soc. Then let us go back to our examples.

  Pro. Where shall we begin?

  Soc. Do we mean anything when we say "a man thirsts"?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. We mean to say that he "is empty"?

  Pro. Of course.

  Soc. And is not thirst desire?

  Pro. Yes, of drink.

  Soc. Would you say of drink, or of replenishment with drink?

  Pro. I should say, of replenishment with drink.

  Soc. Then he who is empty desires, as would appear, the opposite
of what he experiences; for he is empty and desires to be full?

  Pro. Clearly so.

  Soc. But how can a man who is empty for the first time, attain
either by perception or memory to any apprehension of replenishment,
of which he has no present or past experience?

  Pro. Impossible.

  Soc. And yet he who desires, surely desires something?

  Pro. Of course.

  Soc. He does not desire that which he experiences, for he
experiences thirst, and thirst is emptiness; but he desires
replenishment?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Then there must be something in the thirsty man which in some
way apprehends replenishment?

  Pro. There must.

  Soc. And that cannot be the body, for the body is supposed to be
emptied?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. The only remaining alternative is that the soul apprehends
the replenishment by the help of memory; as is obvious, for what other
way can there be?

  Pro. I cannot imagine any other.

  Soc. But do you see the consequence?

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. That there is no such thing as desire of the body.

  Pro. Why so?

  Soc. Why, because the argument shows that the endeavour of every
animal is to the reverse of his bodily state.

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And the impulse which leads him to the opposite of what he is
experiencing proves that he has a memory of the opposite state.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And the argument, having proved that memory attracts us towards
the objects of desire, proves also that the impulses and the desires
and the moving principle in every living being have their origin in
the soul.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. The argument will not allow that our body either hungers or
thirsts or has any similar experience.

  Pro. Quite right.

  Soc. Let me make a further observation; the argument appears to me
to imply that there is a kind of life which consists in these
affections.

  Pro. Of what affections, and of what kind of life, are you speaking?

  Soc. I am speaking of being emptied and replenished, and of all that
relates to the preservation and destruction of living beings, as
well as of the pain which is felt in one of these states and of the
pleasure which succeeds to it.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And what would you say of the intermediate state?

  Pro. What do you mean by "intermediate"?

  Soc. I mean when a person is in actual suffering and yet remembers
past pleasures which, if they would only return, would relieve him;
but as yet he has them not. May we not say of him, that he is in an
intermediate state?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Would you say that he was wholly pained or wholly pleased?

  Pro. Nay, I should say that he has two pains; in his body there is
the actual experience of pain, and in his soul longing and
expectation.

  Soc. What do you mean, Protarchus, by the two pains? May not a man
who is empty have at one time a sure hope of being filled, and at
other times be quite in despair?

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And has he not the pleasure of memory when he is hoping to be
filled, and yet in that he is empty is he not at the same time in
pain?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Then man and the other animals have at the same time both
pleasure and pain?

  Pro. I suppose so.

  Soc. But when a man is empty and has no hope of being filled,
there will be the double experience of pain. You observed this and
inferred that the double experience was the single case possible.

  Pro. Quite true, Socrates.

  Soc. Shall the enquiry into these states of feeling be made the
occasion of raising a question?

  Pro. What question?

  Soc. Whether we ought to say that the pleasures and pains of which
we are speaking are true or false? or some true and some false?

  Pro. But how, Socrates, can there be false pleasures and pains?

  Soc. And how, Protarchus, can there be true and false fears, or true
and false expectations, or true and false opinions?

  Pro. I grant that opinions may be true or false, but not pleasures.

  Soc. What do you mean? I am afraid that we are raising a very
serious enquiry.

  Pro. There I agree.

  Soc. And yet, my boy, for you are one of Philebus' boys, the point
to be considered, is, whether the enquiry is relevant to the argument.

  Pro. Surely.

  Soc. No tedious and irrelevant discussion can be allowed; what is
said should be pertinent.

  Pro. Right.

  Soc. I am always wondering at the question which has now been
raised.

  Pro. How so?

  Soc. Do you deny that some pleasures are false, and others true?

  Pro. To be sure I do.

  Soc. Would you say that no one ever seemed to rejoice and yet did
not rejoice, or seemed to feel pain and yet did not feel pain,
sleeping or waking, mad or lunatic?

  Pro. So we have always held, Socrates.

  Soc. But were you right? Shall we enquire into the truth of your
opinion?

  Pro. I think that we should.

  Soc. Let us then put into more precise terms the question which
has arisen about pleasure and opinion. Is there such a thing as
opinion?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And such a thing as pleasure?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And an opinion must of something?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And a man must be pleased by something?

  Pro. Quite correct.

  Soc. And whether the opinion be right or wrong, makes no difference;
it will still be an opinion?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And he who is pleased, whether he is rightly pleased or not
will always have a real feeling of pleasure?

  Pro. Yes; that is also quite true.

  Soc. Then, how can opinion be both true and false, and pleasure true
only, although pleasure and opinion are both equally real?

  Pro. Yes; that is the question.

  Soc. You mean that opinion admits of truth and falsehood, and
hence becomes not merely opinion, but opinion of a certain quality;
and this is what you think should be examined?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And further, even if we admit the existence of qualities in
other objects, may not pleasure and pain be simple and devoid of
quality?

  Pro. Clearly.

  Soc. But there is no difficulty in seeing that Pleasure and pain
as well as opinion have qualities, for they are great or small, and
have various degrees of intensity; as was indeed said long ago by us.

  Pro. Quite true.

  Soc. And if badness attaches to any of them, Protarchus, then we
should speak of a bad opinion or of a bad pleasure?

  Pro. Quite true, Socrates.

  Soc. And if rightness attaches to any of them, should we not speak
of a right opinion or right pleasure; and in like manner of the
reverse of rightness?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And if the thing opined be erroneous, might we not say that
opinion, being erroneous, is not right or rightly opined?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And if we see a pleasure or pain which errs in respect of its
object, shall we call that right or good, or by any honourable name?

  Pro. Not if the pleasure is mistaken; how could we?

  Soc. And surely pleasure often appears to accompany an opinion which
is not true, but false?

  Pro. Certainly it does; and in that case, Socrates, as we were
saying, the opinion is false, but no one could call the actual
pleasure false.

  Soc. How eagerly, Protarchus, do you rush to the defence of
pleasure!

  Pro. Nay, Socrates, I only repeat what I hear.

  Soc. And is there no difference, my friend, between that pleasure
which is associated with right opinion and knowledge, and that which
is often found in all of us associated with falsehood and ignorance?

  Pro. There must be a very great difference, between them.

  Soc. Then, now let us proceed to contemplate this difference.

  Pro. Lead, and I will follow.

  Soc. Well, then, my view is-

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. We agree-do we not?-that there is such a thing as false, and
also such a thing as true opinion?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And pleasure and pain, as I was just now saying, are often
consequent upon these upon true and false opinion, I mean.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And do not opinion and the endeavour to form an opinion
always spring from memory and perception?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Might we imagine the process to be something of this nature?

  Pro. Of what nature?

  Soc. An object may be often seen at a distance not very clearly, and
the seer may want to determine what it is which he sees.

  Pro. Very likely.

  Soc. Soon he begins to interrogate himself.

  Pro. In what manner?

  Soc. He asks himself-"What is that which appears to be standing by
the rock under the tree?" This is the question which he may be
supposed to put to himself when he sees such an appearance.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. To which he may guess the right answer, saying as if in a
whisper to himself-"It is a man."

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. Or again, he may be misled, and then he will say-"No, it is a
figure made by the shepherds."

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And if he has a companion, he repeats his thought to him in
articulate sounds, and what was before an opinion, has now become a
proposition.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. But if he be walking alone when these thoughts occur to him, he
may not unfrequently keep them in his mind for a considerable time.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. Well, now, I wonder whether, you would agree in my
explanation of this phenomenon.

  Pro. What is your explanation?

  Soc. I think that the soul at such times is like a book.

  Pro. How so?

  Soc. Memory and perception meet, and they and their attendant
feelings seem to almost to write down words in the soul, and when
the inscribing feeling writes truly, then true opinion and true
propositions which are the expressions of opinion come into our
souls-but when the scribe within us writes falsely, the result is
false.

  Pro. I quite assent and agree to your statement their

  Soc. I must bespeak your favour also for another artist, who is busy
at the same time in the chambers of the soul.

  Pro. Who is he?

  Soc. The painter, who, after the scribe has done his work, draws
images in the soul of the things which he has described.

  Pro. But when and how does he do this?

  Soc. When a man, besides receiving from sight or some other sense
certain opinions or statements, sees in his mind the images of the
subjects of them;-is not this a very common mental phenomenom?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And the images answering to true opinions and words are true,
and to false opinions and words false; are they not?

  Pro. They are.

  Soc. If we are right so far, there arises a further question.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. Whether we experience the feeling of which I am speaking only
in relation to the present and the past, or in relation to the
future also?

  Pro. I should say in relation to all times alike.

  Soc. Have not purely mental pleasures and pains been described
already as in some cases anticipations of the bodily ones; from
which we may infer that anticipatory pleasures and pains have to do
with the future?

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. And do all those writings and paintings which, as we were
saying a little while ago, are produced in us, relate to the past
and present only, and not to the future?

  Pro. To the future, very much.

  Soc. When you say, "Very much," you mean to imply that all these
representations are hopes about the future, and that mankind are
filled with, hopes in every stage of existence?

  Pro. Exactly.

  Soc. Answer me another question.

  Pro. What question?

  Soc. A just and pious and good man is the friend of the gods; is
he not?

  Pro. Certainly he is.

  Soc. And the unjust and utterly bad man is the reverse?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And all men, as we were saying just now, are always filled with
hopes?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And these hopes, as they are termed, are propositions which
exist in the minds of each of us?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And the fancies of hope are also pictured in us; a man may
often have a vision of a heap of gold, and pleasures ensuing, and in
the picture there may be a likeness of himself mightily rejoicing over
his good fortune.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And may we not say that the good, being friends of the gods,
have generally true pictures presented to them, and the bad false
pictures?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. The bad, too, have pleasures painted in their fancy as well
as the good; but I presume that they are false pleasures.

  Pro. They are.

  Soc. The bad then commonly delight in false pleasures, and the
good in true pleasures?

  Pro. Doubtless.

  Soc. Then upon this view there are false pleasures in the souls of
men which are a ludicrous imitation of the true, and there are pains
of a similar character?

  Pro. There are.

  Soc. And did we not allow that a man who had an opinion at all had a
real opinion, but often about things which had no existence either
in the past, present, or future?

  Pro. Quite true.

  Soc. And this was the source of false opinion and opining; am I
not right?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And must we not attribute to pleasure and pain a similar real
but illusory character?

  Pro. How do you mean?

  Soc. I mean to say that a man must be admitted to have real
pleasure; who is pleased with anything or anyhow; and he may be
pleased about things which neither have nor have ever had any real
existence, and, more often than not, are never likely to exist.

  Pro. Yes, Socrates, that again is undeniable.

  Soc. And may not the same be said about fear and anger and the like;
are they not often false?

  Pro. Quite so.

  Soc. And can opinions be good or bad except in as far as they are
true or false?

  Pro. In no other way.

  Soc. Nor can pleasures be conceived to be bad except in so far as
they are false.

  Pro. Nay, Socrates, that is the very opposite of truth; for no one
would call pleasures and pains bad because they are false, but by
reason of some other great corruption to which they are liable.

  Soc. Well, of pleasures which are and caused by corruption we will
hereafter speak, if we care to continue the enquiry; for the present I
would rather show by another argument that there are many false
pleasures existing or coming into existence in us, because this may
assist our final decision.

  Pro. Very true; that is to say, if there are such pleasures.

  Soc. I think that there are, Protarchus; but this is an opinion
which should be well assured, and not rest upon a mere assertion.

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. Then now, like wrestlers, let us approach and grasp this new
argument.

  Pro. Proceed.

  Soc. We were maintaining a little while since, that when desires, as
they are termed, exist in us, then the body has separate feelings
apart from the soul-do you remember?

  Pro. Yes, I remember that you said so.

  Soc. And the soul was supposed to desire the opposite of the
bodily state, while the body was the source of any pleasure or pain
which was experienced.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Then now you may infer what happens in such cases.

  Pro. What am I to infer?

  Soc. That in such cases pleasure and pains come simultaneously;
and there is a juxtaposition of the opposite sensations which
correspond to them, as has been already shown.

  Pro. Clearly.

  Soc. And there is another point to which we have agreed.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. That pleasure and pain both admit of more and less, and that
they are of the class of infinites.

  Pro. Certainly, we said so.

  Soc. But how can we rightly judge of them?

  Pro. How can we?

  Soc. It is our intention to judge of their comparative importance
and intensity, measuring pleasure against pain, and pain against pain,
and pleasure against pleasure?

  Pro. Yes, such is our intention, and we shall judge of them
accordingly.

  Soc. Well, take the case of sight. Does not the nearness or distance
of magnitudes obscure their true proportions, and make us opine
falsely; and do we not find the same illusion happening in the case of
pleasures and pains?

  Pro. Yes, Socrates, and in a degree far greater.

  Soc. Then what we are now saying is the opposite of what we were
saying before.

  Pro. What was that?

  Soc. Then the opinions were true and false, and infected the
pleasures and pains with their own falsity.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. But now it is the pleasures which are said to be true and false
because they are seen at various distances, and subjected to
comparison; the pleasures appear to be greater and more vehement
when placed side by side with the pains, and the pains when placed
side by side with the pleasures.

  Pro. Certainly, and for the reason which you mention.

  Soc. And suppose you part off from pleasures and pains the element
which makes them appear to be greater or less than they really are:
you will acknowledge that this element is illusory, and you will never
say that the corresponding excess or defect of pleasure or pain is
real or true.

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. Next let us see whether in another direction we may not find
pleasures and pains existing and appearing in living beings, which are
still more false than these.

  Pro. What are they, and how shall we find them?

  Soc. If I am not mistaken, I have often repeated that pains and
aches and suffering and uneasiness of all sorts arise out of a
corruption of nature caused by concretions, and dissolutions, and
repletions, and evacuations, and also by growth and decay?

  Pro. Yes, that has been often said.

  Soc. And we have also agreed that the restoration of the natural
state is pleasure?

  Pro. Right.

  Soc. But now let us suppose an interval of time at which the body
experiences none of these changes.

  Pro. When can that be, Socrates?

  Soc. Your question, Protarchus, does not help the argument.

  Pro. Why not, Socrates?

  Soc. Because it does not prevent me from repeating mine.

  Pro. And what was that?

  Soc. Why, Protarchus, admitting that there is no such interval, I
may ask what would be the necessary consequence if there were?

  Pro. You mean, what would happen if the body were not changed either
for good or bad?

  Soc. Yes.

  Pro. Why then, Socrates, I should suppose that there would be
neither pleasure nor pain.

  Soc. Very good; but still, if I am not mistaken, you do assert
that we must always be experiencing one of them; that is what the wise
tell us; for, say they, all things are ever flowing up and down.

  Pro. Yes, and their words are of no mean authority.

  Soc. Of course, for they are no mean authorities themselves; and I
should like to avoid the brunt of their argument. Shall I tell you how
I mean to escape from them? And you shall be the partner of my flight.

  Pro. How?

  Soc. To them we will say: "Good; but are we, or living things in
general, always conscious of what happens to us-for example, of our
growth, or the like? Are we not, on the contrary, almost wholly
unconscious of this and similar phenomena?" You must answer for them.

  Pro. The latter alternative is the true one.

  Soc. Then we were not right in saying, just now, that motions
going up and down cause pleasures and pains?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. A better and more unexceptionable way of speaking will be-

  Pro. What?

  Soc. If we say that the great changes produce pleasures and pains,
but that the moderate and lesser ones do neither.

  Pro. That, Socrates, is the more correct mode of speaking.

  Soc. But if this be true, the life to which I was just now referring
again appears.

  Pro. What life?

  Soc. The life which we affirmed to be devoid either of pain or of
joy.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. We may assume then that there are three lives, one pleasant,
one painful, and the third which is neither; what say you?

  Pro. I should say as you do that there are three of them.

  Soc. But if so, the negation of pain will not be the same with
pleasure.

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. Then when you hear a person saying, that always to live without
pain is the pleasantest of all things, what would you understand him
to mean by that statement?

  Pro. I think that by pleasure he must mean the negative of pain.

  Soc. Let us take any three things; or suppose that we embellish a
little and call the first gold, the second silver, and there shall
be a third which is neither.

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. Now, can that which is neither be either gold or silver?

  Pro. Impossible.

  Soc. No more can that neutral or middle life be rightly or
reasonably spoken or thought of as pleasant or painful.

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. And yet, my friend, there are, as we know, persons who say
and think so.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And do they think that they have pleasure when they are free
from pain?

  Pro. They say so.

  Soc. And they must think or they would not say that they have
pleasure.

  Pro. I suppose not.

  Soc. And yet if pleasure and the negation of pain are of distinct
natures, they are wrong.

  Pro. But they are undoubtedly of distinct natures.

  Soc. Then shall we take the view that they are three, as we were
just now saying, or that they are two only-the one being a state of
pain, which is an evil, and the other a cessation of pain, which is of
itself a good, and is called pleasant?

  Pro. But why, Socrates, do we ask the question at all? I do not
see the reason.

  Soc. You, Protarchus, have clearly never heard of certain enemies of
our friend Philebus.

  Pro. And who may they be?

  Soc. Certain persons who are reputed to be masters in natural
philosophy, who deny the very existence of pleasure.

  Pro. Indeed.

  Soc. They say that what the school of Philebus calls pleasures are
all of them only avoidances of pain.

  Pro. And would you, Socrates, have us agree with them?

  Soc. Why, no, I would rather use them as a sort of diviners, who
divine the truth, not by rules of art, but by an instinctive
repugnance and extreme detestation which a noble nature has of the
power of pleasure, in which they think that there is nothing sound,
and her seductive influence is declared by them to be witchcraft,
and not pleasure. This is the use which you may make of them. And when
you have considered the various grounds of their dislike, you shall
hear from me what I deem to be true pleasures. Having thus examined
the nature of pleasure from both points of view, we will bring her
up for judgment.

  Pro. Well said.

  Soc. Then let us enter into an alliance with these philosophers
and follow in the track of their dislike. I imagine that they would
say something of this sort; they would begin at the beginning, and ask
whether, if we wanted to know the nature of any quality, such as
hardness, we should be more likely to discover it by looking at the
hardest things, rather than at the least hard? You, Protarchus,
shall answer these severe gentlemen as you answer me.

  Pro. By all means, and I reply to them, that you should look at
the greatest instances.

  Soc. Then if we want to see the true nature of pleasures as a class,
we should not look at the most diluted pleasures, but at the most
extreme and most vehement?

  Pro. In that every one will agree.

  Soc. And the obvious instances of the greatest pleasures, as we have
often said, are the pleasures of the body?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And are they felt by us to be or become greater, when we are
sick or when we are in health? And here we must be careful in our
answer, or we shall come to grief.

  Pro. How will that be?

  Soc. Why, because we might be tempted to answer, "When we are in
health."

  Pro. Yes, that is the natural answer.

  Soc. Well, but are not those pleasures the greatest of which mankind
have the greatest desires?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And do not people who are in a fever, or any similar illness,
feel cold or thirst or other bodily affections more intensely? Am I
not right in saying that they have a deeper want and greater
pleasure in the satisfaction of their want?

  Pro. That is obvious as soon as it is said.

  Soc. Well, then, shall we not be right in saying, that if a person
would wish to see the greatest pleasures he ought to go and look,
not at health, but at discase? And here you must distinguish:-do not
imagine that I mean to ask whether those who are very ill have more
pleasures than those who are well, but understand that I am speaking
of the magnitude of pleasure; I want to know where pleasures are found
to be most intense. For, as I say, we have to discover what is
pleasure, and what they mean by pleasure who deny her very existence.

  Pro. I think I follow you.

  Soc. You will soon have a better opportunity of showing whether
you do or not, Protarchus. Answer now, and tell me whether you see,
I will not say more, but more intense and excessive pleasures in
wantonness than in temperance? Reflect before you speak.

  Pro. I understand you, and see that there is a great difference
between them; the temperate are restrained by the wise man's
aphorism of "Never too much," which is their rule, but excess of
pleasure possessing the minds of fools and wantons becomes madness and
makes them shout with delight.

  Soc. Very good, and if this be true, then the greatest pleasures and
pains will clearly be found in some vicious state of soul and body,
and not in a virtuous state.

  Pro. Certainly.

 Soc. And ought we not to select some of these for examination, and
see what makes them the greatest?

  Pro. To be sure we ought.

  Soc. Take the case of the pleasures which arise out of certain
disorders.

  Pro. What disorders?

  Soc. The pleasures of unseemly disorders, which our severe friends
utterly detest.

  Pro. What pleasures?

  Soc. Such, for example, as the relief of itching and other
ailments by scratching, which is the only remedy required. For what in
Heaven's name is the feeling to be called which is thus produced in
us?-Pleasure or pain?

  Pro. A villainous mixture of some kind, Socrates, I should say.

  Soc. I did not introduce the argument, O Protarchus, with any
personal reference to Philebus, but because, without the consideration
of these and similar pleasures, we shall not be able to determine
the point at issue.

  Pro. Then we had better proceed to analyze this family of pleasures.

  Soe. You mean the pleasures which are mingled with pain?

  Pro. Exactly.

  Soc. There are some mixtures which are of the body, and only in
the body, and others which are of the soul, and only in the soul;
while there are other mixtures of pleasures with pains, common both to
soul and body, which in their composite state are called sometimes
pleasures and sometimes pains.

  Pro. How is that?

  Soc. Whenever, in the restoration or in the derangement of nature, a
man experiences two opposite feelings; for example, when he is cold
and is growing warm, or again; when he is hot and is becoming cool,
and he wants to have the one and be rid of the other;-the sweet has
a bitter, as the common saying is, and both together fasten upon him
and create irritation and in time drive him to distraction.

  Pro. That description is very true to nature.

  Soc. And in these sorts of mixtures the pleasures and pains are
sometimes equal, and sometimes one or other of them predominates?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Of cases in which the pain exceeds the pleasure, an example
is afforded by itching, of which we were just now speaking, and by the
tingling which we feel when the boiling and fiery element is within,
and the rubbing and motion only relieves the surface, and does not
reach the parts affected; then if you put them to the fire, and as a
last resort apply cold to them, you may often produce the most intense
pleasure or pain in the inner parts, which contrasts and mingles
with the pain or pleasure, as the case may be, of the outer parts; and
this is due to the forcible separation of what is united, or to the
union of what is separated, and to the juxtaposition of pleasure and
pain.

  Pro. Quite so.

  Soc. Sometimes the element of pleasure prevails in a man, and the
slight undercurrent of pain makes him tingle, and causes a gentle
irritation; or again, the excessive infusion of pleasure creates an
excitement in him,-he even leaps for joy, he assumes all sorts of
attitudes, he changes all manner of colours, he gasps for breath,
and is quite amazed, and utters the most irrational exclamations.

  Pro. Yes, indeed.

  Soc. He will say of himself, and others will of him, that he is
dying with these delights; and the more dissipated and
good-for-nothing he is, the more vehemently he pursues them in every
way; of all pleasures he declares them to be the greatest; and he
reckons him who lives in the most constant enjoyment of them to be the
happiest of mankind.

  Pro. That, Socrates, is a very true description of the opinions of
the majority about pleasures.

  Soc. Yes, Protarchus, quite true of the mixed pleasures, which arise
out of the communion of external and internal sensations in the
body; there are also cases in which the mind contributes an,
opposite element to the body, whether of pleasure or pain, and the two
unite and form one mixture. Concerning these I have already
remarked, that when a man is empty he desires to be full, and has
pleasure in hope and pain in vacuity. But now I must further add
what I omitted before, that in all these and similar emotions in which
body and mind are opposed (and they are innumerable), pleasure and
pain coalesce in one.

  Pro. I believe that to be quite true.

  Soc. There still remains one other sort of admixture of pleasures
and pains.

  Pro. What is that?

  Soc. The union which, as we were saying, the mind often
experiences of purely mental feelings.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. Why, do we not speak of anger, fear, desire, sorrow, love,
emulation, envy, and the like, as pains which belong to the soul only?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And shall we not find them also full of the most wonderful
pleasures? need I remind you of the anger

     Which stirs even a wise man to violence,

     And is sweeter than honey and the honeycomb?

And you remember how pleasures mingle with pains in lamentation and
bereavement?

  Pro. Yes, there is a natural connection between them.

  Soc. And you remember also how at the sight of tragedies the
spectators smile through their tear?

  Pro. Certainly I do.

  Soc. And are you aware that even at a comedy the soul experiences
a mixed feeling of pain and pleasure?

  Pro. I do not quite understand you.

  Soc. I admit, Protarchus, that there is some difficulty in
recognizing this mixture of feelings at a comedy.

  Pro. There is, I think.

  Soc. And the greater the obscurity of the case the more desirable
the examination of it because the difficulty in detecting other
cases of mixed pleasures and pains will be less.

  Pro. Proceed.

  Soc. I have just mentioned envy; would you not call that a pain of
the soul?

  Pro. Yes

  Soc. And yet the envious man finds something in the misfortunes of
his neighbours at which he is pleased?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And ignorance, and what is termed clownishness, are surely an
evil?

  Pro. To be sure.

  Soc. From these considerations learn to know the nature of the
ridiculous.

  Pro. Explain.

  Soc. The ridiculous is in short the specific name which is used to
describe the vicious form of a certain habit; and of vice in general
it is that kind which is most at variance with the inscription at
Delphi.

  Pro. You mean, Socrates, "Know thyself."

  Soc. I do; and the opposite would be, "Know not thyself."

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And now, O Protarchus, try to divide this into three.

  Pro. Indeed I am afraid that I cannot.

  Soc. Do you mean to say that I must make the division for you?

  Pro. Yes, and what is more, I beg that you will.

  Soc. Are there not three ways in which ignorance of self may be
shown?

  Pro. What are they?

  Soc. In the first place, about money; the ignorant may fancy himself
richer than he is.

  Pro. Yes, that is a very common error.

  Soc. And still more often he will fancy that he is taller or
fairer than he is, or that he has some other advantage of person which
he really has not.

  Pro. Of course.

  Soc. And yet surely by far the greatest number err about the goods
of the mind; they imagine themselves to be much better men than they
are.

  Pro. Yes, that is by far the commonest delusion.

  Soc. And of all the virtues, is not wisdom the one which the mass of
mankind are always claiming, and which most arouses in them a spirit
of contention and lying conceit of wisdom?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And may not all this be truly called an evil condition?

  Pro. Very evil.

  Soc But we must pursue the division a step further, Protarchus, if
we would see in envy of the childish sort a singular mixture of
pleasure and pain.

  Pro. How can we make the further division which you suggest?

  Soc. All who are silly enough to entertain this lying conceit of
themselves may of course be divided, like the rest of mankind, into
two classes-one having power and might; and the other the reverse.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Let this, then, be the principle of division; those of them who
are weak and unable to revenge themselves, when they are laughed at,
may be truly called ridiculous, but those who can defend themselves
may be more truly described as strong and formidable; for ignorance in
the powerul is hateful and horrible, because hurtful to others both in
reality and in fiction, but powerless ignorance may be reckoned, and
in truth is, ridiculous.

  Pro. That is very true, but I do not as yet see where is the
admixture of pleasures and pains.

  Soc. Well, then, let us examine the nature of envy.

  Pro. Proceed.

  Soc. Is not envy an unrighteous pleasure, and also an unrighteous
pain?

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. There is nothing envious or wrong in rejoicing at the
misfortunes of enemies?

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. But to feel joy instead of sorrow at the sight of our
friends' misfortunes-is not that wrong?

  Pro. Undoubtedly.

  Soc. Did we not say that ignorance was always an evil?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And the three kinds of vain conceit in our friends which we
enumerated-the vain conceit of beauty, of wisdom, and of wealth, are
ridiculous if they are weak, and detestable when they are powerful:
May we not say, as I was saying before, that our friends who are in
this state of mind, when harmless to others, are simply ridiculous?

  Pro. They are ridiculous.

  Soc. And do we not acknowledge this ignorance of theirs to be a
misfortune?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And do we feel pain or pleasure in laughing at it?

  Pro. Clearly we feel pleasure.

  Soc. And was not envy the source of this pleasure which we feel at
the misfortunes of friends?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Then the argument shows that when we laugh at the folly of
our friends, pleasure, in mingling with envy, mingles with pain, for
envy has been acknowledged by us to be mental pain, and laughter is
pleasant; and so we envy and laugh at the same instant.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And the argument implies that there are combinations of
pleasure and pain in lamentations, and in tragedy and comedy, not only
on the stage, but on the greater stage of human life; and so in
endless other cases.

  Pro. I do not see how any one can deny what you say, Socrates,
however eager he may be to assert the opposite opinion.

  Soc. I mentioned anger, desire, sorrow, fear, love, emulation, envy,
and similar emotions, as examples in which we should find a mixture of
the two elements so often named; did I not?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. We may observe that our conclusions hitherto have had reference
only to sorrow and envy and anger.

  Pro. I see.

  Soc. Then many other cases still remain?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And why do you suppose me to have pointed out to you the
admixture which takes place in comedy? Why but to convince you that
there was no difficulty in showing the mixed nature of fear and love
and similar affections; and I thought that when I had given you the
illustration, you would have let me off, and have acknowledged as a
general truth that the body without the soul, and the soul without the
body, as well as the two united, are susceptible of all sorts of
admixtures of pleasures and pains; and so further discussion would
have been unnecessary. And now I want to know whether I may depart; or
will you keep me here until midnight? I fancy that I may obtain my
release without many words;-if I promise that to-morrow I will give
you an account of all these cases. But at present I would rather
sail in another direction, and go to other matters which remain to
be settled, before the judgment can be given which Philebus demands.

  Pro. Very good, Socrates; in what remains take your own course.

  Soc. Then after the mixed pleasures the unmixed should have their
turn; this is the natural and necessary order.

  Pro. Excellent.

  Soc. These, in turn, then, I will now endeavour to indicate; for
with the maintainers of the opinion that all pleasures are a cessation
of pain, I do not agree, but, as I was saying, I use them as
witnesses, that there are pleasures which seem only and are not, and
there are others again which have great power and appear in many
forms, yet are intermingled with pains, and are partly alleviations of
agony and distress, both of body and mind.

  Pro. Then what pleasures, Socrates, should we be right in conceiving
to be true?

  Soc. True pleasures are those which are given by beauty of colour
and form, and most of of those which arise from smells; those of
sound, again, and in general those of which the want is painless and
unconscious, and of which the fruition is palpable to sense and
pleasant and unalloyed with pain.

  Pro. Once more, Socrates, I must ask what you mean.

  Soc. My meaning is certainly not obvious, and I will endeavour to be
plainer. I do not mean by beauty of form such beauty as that of
animals or pictures, which the many would suppose to be my meaning;
but, says the argument, understand me to mean straight lines and
circles, and the plane solid figures which are formed out of them by
turning-lathes and rulers and measurers of angles; for these I
affirm to be not only relatively beautiful, like other things, but
they are eternally and absolutely beautiful, and they have peculiar
pleasures, quite unlike the pleasures of scratching. And there are
colours which are of the same character, and have similar pleasures;
now do you understand my meaning?

  Pro. I am trying to understand, Socrates, and I hope that you will
try to make your meaning dearer.

  Soc. When sounds are smooth and clear, and have a single pure
tone, then I mean to say that they are not relatively but absolutely
beautiful, and have natural pleasures associated with them.

  Pro. Yes, there are such pleasures.

  Soc. The pleasures of smell are of a less ethereal sort, but they
have no necessary admixture of pain; and all pleasures, however and
wherever experienced, which are unattended by pains, I assign to an
analogous class. Here then are two kinds of pleasures.

  Pro. I understand.

  Soc. To these may be added the pleasures of knowledge, if no
hunger of knowledge and no pain caused by such hunger precede them.

  Pro. And this is the case.

  Soc. Well, but if a man who is full of knowledge loses his
knowledge, are there not pains of forgetting?

  Pro. Not necessarily, but there may be times of reflection, when
he feels grief at the loss of his knowledge.

  Soc. Yes, my friend, but at present we are enumerating only the
natural perceptions, and have nothing to do with reflection.

  Pro. In that case you are right in saying that the loss of knowledge
is not attended with pain.

  Soc. These pleasures of knowledge, then, are unmixed with pain;
and they are not the pleasures of the many but of a very few.

  Pro. Quite true.

  Soc. And now, having fairly separated the pure pleasures and those
which may be rightly termed impure, let us further add to our
description of them, that the pleasures which are in excess have no
measure, but that those which are not in excess have measure; the
great, the excessive, whether more or less frequent, we shall be right
in referring to the class of the infinite, and of the more and less,
which pours through body and soul alike; and the others we shall refer
to the class which has measure.

  Pro. Quite right, Socrates.

  Soc. Still there is something more to be considered about pleasures.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. When you speak of purity and clearness, or of excess,
abundance, greatness and sufficiency, in what relation do these
terms stand to truth?

  Pro. Why do you ask, Socrates?

  Soc. Because, Protarchus, I should wish to test pleasure and
knowledge in every possible way, in order that if there be a pure
and impure element in either of them, I may present the pure element
for judgment, and then they will be more easily judged of by you and
by me and by all of us.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. Let us investigate all the pure kinds; first selecting for
consideration a single instance.

  Pro. What instance shall we select?

  Soc. Suppose that we first of all take whiteness.

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. How can there be purity in whiteness, and what purity? Is
that purest which is greatest or most in quantity, or that which is
most unadulterated and freest from any admixture of other colours?

  Pro. Clearly that which is most unadulterated.

  Soc. True, Protarchus; and so the purest white, and not the greatest
or largest in quantity, is to be deemed truest and most beautiful?

  Pro. Right.

  Soc. And we shall be quite right in saying that a little pure
white is whiter and fairer and truer than a great deal that is mixed.

  Pro. Perfectly right.

  Soc. There is no need of adducing many similar examples in
illustration of the argument about pleasures; one such is sufficient
to prove to us that a small pleasure or a small amount of pleasure, if
pure or unalloyed with pain. is always pleasanter and truer and fairer
than a great pleasure or a great amount of pleasure of another kind.

  Pro. Assuredly; and the instance you have given is quite sufficient.

  Soc. But what do you say of another question:-have we not heard that
pleasure is always a generation, and has no true being? Do not certain
ingenious philosophers teach this doctrine, and ought not we to be
grateful to them?

  Pro. What do they mean?

  Soc. I will explain to you, my dear Protarchus, what they mean, by
putting a question.

  Pro. Ask, and I will answer.

  Soc. I assume that there are two natures, one self-existent, and the
other ever in want of something.

  Pro. What manner of natures are they?

  Soc. The one majestic ever, the other inferior.

  Pro. You speak riddles.

  Soc. You have seen loves good and fair, and also brave lovers of
them.

  Pro. I should think so.

  Soc. Search the universe for two terms which are like these two
and are present everywhere.

  Pro. Yet a third time I must say, Be a little plainer, Socrates.

  Soc. There is no difficulty, Protarchus; the argument is only in
play, and insinuates that some things are for the sake of something
else (relatives), and that other things are the ends to which the
former class subserve (absolutes).

  Pro. Your many repetitions make me slow to understand.

  Soc. As the argument proceeds, my boy, I dare say that the meaning
will become clearer.

  Pro. Very likely.

  Soc. Here are two new principles.

  Pro. What are they?

  Soc. One is the generation of all things, and the other is essence.

  Pro. I readily accept from you both generation and essence.

  Soc. Very right; and would you say that generation is for the sake
of essence, or essence for the sake of generation?

  Pro. You want to know whether that which is called essence is,
properly speaking, for the sake of generation?

  Soc. Yes.

  Pro. By the gods, I wish that you would repeat your question.

  Soc. I mean, O my Protarchus, to ask whether you would tell me
that ship-building is for the sake of ships, or ships for the sake
of ship-building? and in all similar cases I should ask the same
question.

  Pro. Why do you not answer yourself, Socrates?

  Soc. I have no objection, but you must take your part.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. My answer is, that all things instrumental, remedial, material,
are given to us with a view to generation, and that each generation is
relative to, or for the sake of, some being or essence, and that the
whole of generation is relative to the whole of essence.

  Pro. Assuredly.

  Soc. Then pleasure, being a generation, must surely be for the
sake of some essence?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And that for the sake of which something else is done must be
placed in the class of good, and that which is done for the sake of
something else, in some other class, my good friend.

  Pro. Most certainly.

  Soc. Then pleasure, being a generation, will be rightly placed in
some other class than that of good?

  Pro. Quite right.

  Soc. Then, as I said at first, we ought to be very grateful to him
who first pointed out that pleasure was a generation only, and had
no true being at all; for he is clearly one who laughs at the notion
of pleasure being a good.

  Pro. Assuredly.

  Soc. And he would surely laugh also at those who make generation
their highest end.

  Pro. Of whom are you speaking, and what do they mean?

  Soc. I am speaking of those who when they are cured of hunger or
thirst or any other defect by some process of generation are delighted
at the process as if it were pleasure; and they say that they would
not wish to live without these and other feelings of a like kind which
might be mentioned.

  Pro. That is certainly what they appear to think.

  Soc. And is not destruction universally admitted to be the
opposite of generation?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Then he who chooses thus, would choose generation and
destruction rather than that third sort of life, in which, as we
were saying, was neither pleasure nor pain, but only the purest
possible thought.

  Pro. He who would make us believe pleasure to be a good is
involved in great absurdities, Socrates.

  Soc. Great, indeed; and there is yet another of them.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. Is there not an absurdity in arguing that there is nothing good
or noble in the body, or in anything else, but that good is in the
soul only, and that the only good of the soul is pleasure; and that
courage or temperance or understanding, or any other good of the soul,
is not really a good?-and is there not yet a further absurdity in
our being compelled to say that he who has a feeling of pain and not
of pleasure is bad at the time when he is suffering pain, even
though he be the best of men; and again, that he who has a feeling
of pleasure, in so far as he is pleased at the time when he is
pleased, in that degree excels in virtue?

  Pro. Nothing, Socrates, can be more irrational than all this.

  Soc. And now, having subjected pleasure to every sort of test, let
us not appear to be too sparing of mind and knowledge: let us ring
their metal bravely, and see if there be unsoundness in any part,
until we have found out what in them is of the purest nature; and then
the truest elements both of pleasure and knowledge may be brought up
for judgment.

  Pro. Right.

  Soc. Knowledge has two parts-the one productive, and the other
educational?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And in the productive or handicraft arts, is not one part
more akin to knowledge, and the other less; and may not the one part
be regarded as the pure, and the other as the impure?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Let us separate the superior or dominant elements in each of
them.

  Pro. What are they, and how do you separate them?

  Soc. I mean to say, that if arithmetic, mensuration, and weighing be
taken away from any art, that which remains will not be much.

  Pro. Not much, certainly.

  Soc. The rest will be only conjecture, and the better use of the
senses which is given by experience and practice, in addition to a
certain power of guessing, which is commonly called art, and is
perfected by attention and pains.

  Pro. Nothing more, assuredly.

  Soc. Music, for instance, is full of this empiricism; for sounds are
harmonized, not by measure, but by skilful conjecture; the music of
the flute is always trying to guess the pitch of each vibrating
note, and is therefore mixed up with much that is doubtful and has
little which is certain.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. And the same will be found to hold good of medicine and
husbandry and piloting and generalship.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. The art of the builder, on the other hand, which uses a
number of measures and instruments, attains by their help to a greater
degree of accuracy than the other arts.

  Pro. How is that?

  Soc. In ship-building and house-building, and in other branches of
the art of carpentering, the builder has his rule, lathe, compass,
line, and a most ingenious machine for straightening wood.

  Pro. Very true, Socrates.

  Soc. Then now let us divide the arts of which we were speaking
into two kinds-the arts which, like music, are less exact in their
results, and those which, like carpentering, are more exact.

  Pro. Let us make that division.

  Soc. Of the latter class, the most exact of all are those which we
just now spoke of as primary.

  Pro. I see that you mean arithmetic, and the kindred arts of
weighing and measuring.

  Soc. Certainly, Protarchus; but are not these also distinguishable
into two kinds?

  Pro. What are the two kinds?

  Soc. In the first place, arithmetic is of two kinds, one of which is
popular, and the other philosophical.

  Pro. How would you distinguish them?

  Soc. There is a wide difference between them, Protarchus; some
arithmeticians reckon unequal units; as for example, two armies, two
oxen, two very large things or two very small things. The party who
are opposed to them insist that every unit in ten thousand must be the
same as every other unit.

  Pro. Undoubtedly there is, as you say, a great difference among
the votaries of the science; and there may be reasonably supposed to
be two sorts of arithmetic.

  Soc. And when we compare the art of mensuration which is used in
building with philosophical geometry, or the art of computation
which is used in trading with exact calculation, shall we say of
either of the pairs that it is one or two?

  Pro. On the analogy of what has preceded, I should be of opinion
that they were severally two.

  Soc. Right; but do you understand why I have discussed the subject?

  Pro. I think so, but I should like to be told by you.

  Soc. The argument has all along been seeking a parallel to pleasure,
and true to that original design, has gone on to ask whether one
sort of knowledge is purer than another, as one pleasure is purer than
another.

  Pro. Clearly; that was the intention.

  Soc. And has not the argument in what has preceded, already shown
that the arts have different provinces, and vary in their degrees of
certainty?

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And just now did not the argument first designate a
particular art by a common term, thus making us believe in the unity
of that art; and then again, as if speaking of two different things,
proceed to enquire whether the art as pursed by philosophers, or as
pursued by non philosophers, has more of certainty and purity?

  Pro. That is the very question which the argument is asking.

  Soc. And how, Protarchus, shall we answer the enquiry?

  Pro. O Socrates, we have reached a point at which the difference
of clearness in different kinds of knowledge is enormous.

  Soc. Then the answer will be the easier.

  Pro. Certainly; and let us say in reply, that those arts into
which arithmetic and mensuration enter, far surpass all others; and
that of these the arts or sciences which are animated by the pure
philosophic impulse are infinitely superior in accuracy and truth.

  Soc. Then this is your judgment; and this is the answer which,
upon your authority, we will give to all masters of the art of
misinterpretation?

  Pro. What answer?

  Soc. That there are two arts of arithmetic, and two of
mensuration; and also several other arts which in like manner have
this double nature, and yet only one name.

  Pro. Let us boldly return this answer to the masters of whom you
speak, Socrates, and hope for good luck.

  Soc. We have explained what we term the most exact arts or sciences.

  Pro. Very good.

  Soc. And yet, Protarchus, dialectic will refuse to acknowledge us,
if we do not award to her the first place.

  Pro. And pray, what is dialectic?

  Soc. Clearly the science which has to do with all that knowledge
of which we are now speaking; for I am sure that all men who have a
grain of intelligence will admit that the knowledge which has to do
with being and reality, and sameness and unchangeableness, is by far
the truest of all. But how would you decide this question, Protarchus?

  Pro. I have often heard Gorgias maintain, Socrates, that the art
of persuasion far surpassed every other; this, as he says, is by far
the best of them all, for to it all things submit, not by
compulsion, but of their own free will. Now, I should not like to
quarrel either with you or with him.

  Soc. You mean to say that you would like to desert, if you were
not ashamed?

  Pro. As you please.

  Soc. May I not have led you into a misapprehension?

  Pro. How?

  Soc. Dear Protarchus, I never asked which was the greatest or best
or usefullest of arts or sciences, but which had clearness and
accuracy, and the greatest amount of truth, however humble and
little useful an art. And as for Gorgias, if you do not deny that
his art has the advantage in usefulness to mankind, he will not
quarrel with you for saying that the study of which I am speaking is
superior in this particular of essential truth; as in the comparison
of white colours, a little whiteness, if that little be only pure, was
said to be superior in truth to a great mass which is impure. And
now let us give our best attention and consider well, not the
comparative use or reputation of the sciences, but the power or
faculty, if there be such, which the soul has of loving the truth, and
of doing all things for the sake of it; let us search into the pure
element of mind and intelligence, and then we shall be able to say
whether the science of which I have been speaking is most likely to
possess the faculty, or whether there be some other which has higher
claims.

  Pro. Well, I have been considering, and I can hardly think that
any other science or art has a firmer grasp of the truth than this.

  Soc. Do you say so because you observe that the arts in general
and those engaged in them make use of opinion, and are resolutely
engaged in the investigation of matters of opinion? Even he who
supposes himself to be occupied with nature is really occupied with
the things of this world, how created, how acting or acted upon. Is
not this the sort of enquiry in which his life is spent?

  Pro. True.

  Soc. He is labouring, not after eternal being, but about things
which are becoming, or which will or have become.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And can we say that any of these things which neither are nor
have been nor will be unchangeable, when judged by the strict rule
of truth, ever become certain?

  Pro. Impossible.

  Soc. How can anything fixed be concerned with that which has no
fixedness?

  Pro. How indeed?

  Soc. Then mind and science when employed about such changing
things do not attain the highest truth?

  Pro. I should imagine not.

  Soc. And now let us bid farewell, a long farewell, to you or me or
Philebus or Gorgias, and urge on behalf of the argument a single
point.

  Pro. What point?

  Soc. Let us say that the stable and pure and true and unalloyed
has to do with the things which are eternal and unchangeable and
unmixed, or if not, at any rate what is most akin to them has; and
that all other things are to be placed in a second or inferior class.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. And of the names expressing cognition, ought not the fairest to
be given to the fairest things?

  Pro. That is natural.

  Soc. And are not mind and wisdom the names which are to be
honoured most?

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And these names may be said to have their truest, and most
exact application when the mind is engaged in the contemplation of
true being?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And these were the names which I adduced of the rivals of
pleasure?

  Pro. Very true, Socrates.

  Soc. In the next place, as to the mixture, here are the ingredients,
pleasure and wisdom, and we may be compared to artists who have
their materials ready to their hands.

  Pro. Yes.

  Soc. And now we must begin to mix them?

  Pro. By all means.

  Soc. But had we not better have a preliminary word and refresh our
memories?

  Pro. Of what?

  Soc. Of that which I have already mentioned. Well says the
proverb, that we ought to repeat twice and even thrice that which is
good.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Well then, by Zeus, let us proceed, and I will make what I
believe to be a fair summary of the argument.

  Pro. Let me hear.

  Soc. Philebus says that pleasure is the true end of all living
beings, at which all ought to aim, and moreover that it is the chief
good of all, and that the two names "good" and "pleasant" are
correctly given to one thing and one nature; Socrates, on the other
hand, begins by denying this, and further says, that in nature as in
name they are two, and that wisdom partakes more than pleasure of
the good. Is not and was not this what we were saying, Protarchus?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And is there not and was there not a further point which was
conceded between us?

  Pro. What was it?

  Soc. That the good differs from all other things.

  Pro. In what respect?

  Soc. In that the being who possesses good always everywhere and in
all things has the most perfect sufficiency, and is never in need of
anything else.

  Pro. Exactly.

  Soc. And did we not endeavour to make an imaginary separation of
wisdom and pleasure, assigning to each a distinct life, so that
pleasure was wholly excluded from wisdom, and wisdom in like manner
had no part whatever in pleasure?

  Pro. We did.

  Soc. And did we think that either of them alone would be sufficient?

  Pro. Certainly not.

  Soc. And if we erred in any point, then let any one who will, take
up the enquiry again and set us right; and assuming memory and
wisdom and knowledge and true opinion to belong to the same class, let
him consider whether he would desire to possess or acquire-I will
not say pleasure, however abundant or intense, if he has no real
perception that he is pleased, nor any consciousness of what he feels,
nor any recollection, however momentary, of the feeling,-but would
he desire to have anything at all, if these faculties were wanting
to him? And about wisdom I ask the same question; can you conceive
that any one would choose to have all wisdom absolutely devoid of
pleasure, rather than with a certain degree of pleasure, or all
pleasure devoid of wisdom, rather than with a certain degree of
wisdom?

  Pro. Certainly not, Socrates; but why repeat such questions any
more?

  Soc. Then the perfect and universally eligible and entirely good
cannot possibly be either of them?

  Pro. Impossible.

  Soc. Then now we must ascertain the nature of the good more or
less accurately, in order, as we were saying, that the second place
may be duly assigned.

  Pro. Right.

  Soc. Have we not found a road which leads towards the good?

  Pro. What road?

  Soc. Supposing that a man had to be found, and you could discover in
what house he lived, would not that be a great step towards the
discovery of the man himself?

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And now reason intimates to us, as at our first beginning, that
we should seek the good, not in the unmixed life but in the mixed.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. There is greater hope of finding that which we are seeking in
the life which is well mixed than in that which is not?

  Pro. Far greater.

  Soc. Then now let us mingle, Protarchus, at the same time offering
up a prayer to Dionysus or Hephaestus, or whoever is the god who
presides over the ceremony of mingling.

  Pro. By all means.

  Soc. Are not we the cup-bearers? and here are two fountains which
are flowing at our side: one, which is pleasure, may be likened to a
fountain of honey; the other, wisdom, a sober draught in which no wine
mingles, is of water unpleasant but healthful; out of these we must
seek to make the fairest of all possible mixtures.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Tell me first;-should we be most likely to succeed if we
mingled every sort of pleasure with every sort of wisdom?

  Pro. Perhaps we might.

  Soc. But I should be afraid of the risk, and I think that I can show
a safer plan.

  Pro. What is it?

  Soc. One pleasure was supposed by us to be truer than another, and
one art to be more exact than another.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. There was also supposed to be a difference in sciences; some of
them regarding only the transient and perishing, and others the
permanent and imperishable and everlasting and immutable; and when
judged by the standard of truth, the latter, as we thought, were truer
than the former.

  Pro. Very good and right.

  Soc. If, then, we were to begin by mingling the sections of each
class which have the most of truth, will not the union suffice to give
us the loveliest of lives, or shall we still want some elements of
another kind?

  Pro. I think that we ought to do what you suggest.

  Soc. Let us suppose a man who understands justice, and has reason as
well as understanding about the true nature of this and of all other
things.

  Pro. We will suppose such a man.

  Soc. Will he have enough of knowledge if he is acquainted only
with the divine circle and sphere, and knows nothing of our human
spheres and circles, but uses only divine circles and measures in
the building of a house?

  Pro. The knowledge which is only superhuman, Socrates, is ridiculous
in man.

  Soc. What do you mean? Do you mean that you are to throw into the
cup and mingle the impure and uncertain art which uses the false
measure and the false circle?

  Pro. Yes, we must, if any of us is ever to find his way home.

  Soc. And am I to include music, which, as, I was saying just now, is
full of guesswork and imitation, and is wanting in purity?

  Pro. Yes, I think that you must, if human life is to be a life at
all.

  Soc. Well, then, suppose that I give way, and, like a doorkeeper who
is pushed and overborne by the mob, I open the door wide, and let
knowledge of every sort stream in, and the pure mingle with the
impure?

  Pro. I do not know, Socrates, that any great harm would come of
having them all, if only you have the first sort.

  Soc. Well, then, shall I let them all flow into what Homer
poetically terms "a meeting of the waters"?

  Pro. By all means.

  Soc. There-I have let him in, and now I must return to the
fountain of pleasure. For we were not permitted to begin by mingling
in a single stream the true portions of both according to our original
intention; but the love of all knowledge constrained us to let all the
sciences flow in together before the pleasures.

  Pro. Quite true.

  Soc. And now the time has come for us to consider about the
pleasures also, whether we shall in like manner let them go all at
once, or at first only the true ones.

  Pro. It will be by far the safer course to let flow the true ones
first.

  Soc. Let them flow, then; and now, if there are any necessary
pleasures, as there were arts and sciences necessary, must we not
mingle them?

  Pro. Yes, the necessary pleasures should certainly be allowed to
mingle.

  Soc. The knowledge of the arts has been admitted to be innocent
and useful always; and if we say of pleasures in like manner that
all of them are good and innocent for all of us at all times, we
must let them all mingle?

  Pro. What shall we say about them, and what course shall we take?

  Soc. Do not ask me, Protarchus; but ask the daughters of pleasure
and wisdom to answer for themselves.

  Pro. How?

  Soc. Tell us, O beloved-shall we call you pleasures or by some other
name?-would you rather live with or without wisdom? I am of opinion
that they would certainly answer as follows:

  Pro. How?

  Soc. They would answer, as we said before, that for any single class
to be left by itself pure and isolated is not good, nor altogether
possible; and that if we are to make comparisons of one class with
another and choose, there is no better companion than knowledge of
things in general, and likewise the perfect knowledge, if that may be,
of ourselves in every respect.

  Pro. And our answer will be:-In that ye have spoken well.

  Soc. Very true. And now let us go back and interrogate wisdom and
mind: Would you like to have any pleasures in the mixture? And they
will reply:-"What pleasures do you mean?"

  Pro. Likely enough.

  Soc. And we shall take up our parable and say: Do you wish to have
the greatest and most vehement pleasures for your companions in
addition to the true ones? "Why, Socrates," they will say, "how can
we? seeing that they are the source of ten thousand hindrances to
us; they trouble the souls of men, which are our habitation, with
their madness; they prevent us from coming to the birth, and are
commonly the ruin of the children which are born to us, causing them
to be forgotten and unheeded; but the true and pure pleasures, of
which you spoke, know to be of our family, and also those pleasures
which accompany health and temperance, and which every Virtue, like
a goddess has in her train to follow her about wherever she
goes,-mingle these and not the others; there would be great want of
sense in any one who desires to see a fair and perfect mixture, and to
find in it what is the highest good in man and in the universe, and to
divine what is the true form of good-there would be great want of
sense in his allowing the pleasures, which are always in the company
of folly and vice, to mingle with mind in the cup."-Is not this a very
rational and suitable reply, which mind has made, both on her own
behalf, as well as on the behalf of memory and true opinion?

  Pro. Most certainly.

  Soc. And still there must be something more added, which is a
necessary ingredient in every mixture.

  Pro. What is that?

  Soc. Unless truth enter into the composition, nothing can truly be
created or subsist.

  Pro. Impossible.

  Soc. Quite impossible; and now you and Philebus must tell me whether
anything is still wanting in the mixture, for to my way of thinking
the argument is now completed, and may be compared to an incorporeal
law, which is going to hold fair rule over a living body.

  Pro. I agree with you, Socrates.

  Soc. And may we not say with reason that we are now at the vestibule
of the habitation of the good?

  Pro. I think that we are.

  Soc. What, then, is there in the mixture which is most precious, and
which is the principal cause why such a state is universally beloved
by all? When we have discovered it, we will proceed to ask whether
this omnipresent nature is more akin to pleasure or to mind.

  Pro. Quite right; in that way we shall be better able to judge.

  Soc. And there is no difficulty in seeing the cause which renders
any mixture either of the highest value or of none at all.

  Pro. What do you mean?

  Soc. Every man knows it.

  Pro. What?

  Soc. He knows that any want of measure and symmetry in any mixture
whatever must always of necessity be fatal, both to the elements and
to the mixture, which is then not a mixture, but only a confused
medley which brings confusion on the possessor of it.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. And now the power of the good has retired into the region of
the beautiful; for measure and symmetry are beauty and virtue all
the world over.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Also we said that truth was to form an element in the mixture.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. Then, if we are not able to hunt the good with one idea only,
with three we may catch our prey; Beauty, Symmetry, Truth are the
three, and these taken together we may regard as the single cause of
the mixture, and the mixture as being good by reason of the infusion
of them.

  Pro. Quite right.

  Soc. And now, Protarchus, any man could decide well enough whether
pleasure or wisdom is more akin to the highest good, and more
honourable among gods and men.

  Pro. Clearly, and yet perhaps the argument had better be pursued
to the end.

  Soc. We must take each of them separately in their relation to
pleasure and mind, and pronounce upon them; for we ought to see to
which of the two they are severally most akin.

  Pro. You are speaking of beauty, truth, and measure?

  Soc. Yes, Protarchus, take truth first, and, after passing in review
mind, truth, pleasure, pause awhile and make answer to yourself-as
to whether pleasure or mind is more akin to truth.

  Pro. There is no need to pause, for the difference between them is
palpable; pleasure is the veriest impostor in the world; and it is
said that in the pleasures of love, which appear to be the greatest,
perjury is excused by the gods; for pleasures, like children, have not
the least particle of reason in them; whereas mind is either the
same as truth, or the most like truth, and the truest.

  Soc. Shall we next consider measure, in like manner, and ask whether
pleasure has more of this than wisdom, or wisdom than pleasure?

  Pro. Here is another question which may be easily answered; for I
imagine that nothing can ever be more immoderate than the transports
of pleasure, or more in conformity with measure than mind and
knowledge.

  Soc. Very good; but there still remains the third test: Has mind a
greater share of beauty than pleasure, and is mind or pleasure the
fairer of the two?

  Pro. No one, Socrates, either awake or dreaming, ever saw or
imagined mind or wisdom to be in aught unseemly, at any time, past,
present, or future.

  Soc. Right.

  Pro. But when we see some one indulging in pleasures, perhaps in the
greatest of pleasures, the ridiculous or disgraceful nature of the
action makes us ashamed; and so we put them out of sight, and
consign them to darkness, under the idea that they ought not to meet
the eye of day.

  Soc. Then, Protarchus, you will proclaim everywhere, by word of
mouth to this company, and by messengers bearing the tidings far and
wide, that pleasure is not the first of possessions, nor yet the
second, but that in measure, and the mean, and the suitable, and the
like, the eternal nature has been found.

  Pro. Yes, that seems to be the result of what has been now said.

  Soc. In the second class is contained the symmetrical and
beautiful and perfect or sufficient, and all which are of that family.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. And if you reckon in the third dass mind and wisdom, you will
not be far wrong, if I divine aright.

  Pro. I dare say.

  Soc. And would you not put in the fourth class the goods which we
were affirming to appertain specially to the soul-sciences and arts
and true opinions as we called them? These come after the third class,
and form the fourth, as they are certainly more akin to good than
pleasure is.

  Pro. Surely.

  Soc. The fifth class are the pleasures which were defined by us as
painless, being the pure pleasures of the soul herself, as we termed
them, which accompany, some the sciences, and some the senses.

  Pro. Perhaps.

  Soc. And now, as Orpheus says,

      With the sixth generation cease the glory of my song.

Here, at the sixth award, let us make an end; all that remains is to
set the crown on our discourse.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. Then let us sum up and reassert what has been said, thus
offering the third libation to the saviour Zeus.

  Pro. How?

  Soc. Philebus affirmed that pleasure was always and absolutely the
good.

  Pro. I understand; this third libation, Socrates, of which you
spoke, meant a recapitulation.

  Soc. Yes, but listen to the sequel; convinced of what I have just
been saying, and feeling indignant at the doctrine, which is
maintained, not by Philebus only, but by thousands of others, I
affirmed that mind was far better and far more excellent, as an
element of human life, than pleasure.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. But, suspecting that there were other things which were also
better, I went on to say that if there was anything better than
either, then I would claim the second place for mind over pleasure,
and pleasure would lose the second place as well as the first.

  Pro. You did.

  Soc. Nothing could be more satisfactorily shown than the
unsatisfactory nature of both of them.

  Pro. Very true.

  Soc. The claims both of pleasure and mind to be the absolute good
have been entirely disproven in this argument, because they are both
wanting in self-sufficiency and also in adequacy and perfection.

  Pro. Most true.

  Soc. But, though they must both resign in favour of another, mind is
ten thousand times nearer and more akin to the nature of the conqueror
than pleasure.

  Pro. Certainly.

  Soc. And, according to the judgment which has now been given,
pleasure will rank fifth.

  Pro. True.

  Soc. But not first; no, not even if all the oxen and horses and
animals in the world by their pursuit of enjoyment proclaim her to
be so;-although the many trusting in them, as diviners trust in birds,
determine that pleasures make up the good of life, and deem the
lusts of animals to be better witnesses than the inspirations of
divine philosophy.

  Pro. And now, Socrates, we tell you that the truth of what you
have been saying is approved by the judgment of all of us.

  Soc. And will you let me go?

  Pro. There is a little which yet remains, and I will remind you of
it, for I am sure that you will not be the first to go away from an
argument.

                          -THE END-
.
*****The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Republic by Plato******

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.

**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.

Plato's Republic

July, 1994  [Etext #150]

****The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Republic, by Plato*****
*****This file should be named repub13.txt or repub13.zip*****

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, repub14.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, repub13a.txt

We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.

Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce 2
million dollars per hour this year we, will have to do four text
files per month:  thus upping our productivity from one million.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is 10% of the expected number of computer users by the end
of the year 2001.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu (internet)   hart@uiucvmd   (bitnet)

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext91
or cd etext92
or cd etext93 [for new books]  [now also in cd etext/etext93]
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
get INDEX100.GUT
get INDEX200.GUT
for a list of books
and
get NEW.GUT for general information
and
mget GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Illinois Benedictine College (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Illinois
     Benedictine College" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

This "Small Print!" by Charles B. Kramer, Attorney
Internet (72600.2026@compuserve.com); TEL: (212-254-5093)
*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*

THE REPUBLIC

by Plato
(360 B.C.)

translated by Benjamin Jowett

THE INTRODUCTION

THE Republic of Plato is the longest of his works with the exception
of the Laws, and is certainly the greatest of them.  There are nearer
approaches to modern metaphysics in the Philebus and in the Sophist;
the Politicus or Statesman is more ideal; the form and institutions
of the State are more clearly drawn out in the Laws; as works of art,
the Symposium and the Protagoras are of higher excellence.  But no
other Dialogue of Plato has the same largeness of view and the same
perfection of style; no other shows an equal knowledge of the world,
or contains more of those thoughts which are new as well as old,
and not of one age only but of all.  Nowhere in Plato is there a deeper
irony or a greater wealth of humor or imagery, or more dramatic power. 
Nor in any other of his writings is the attempt made to interweave
life and speculation, or to connect politics with philosophy. 
The Republic is the centre around which the other Dialogues may
be grouped; here philosophy reaches the highest point to which ancient
thinkers ever attained.  Plato among the Greeks, like Bacon among
the moderns, was the first who conceived a method of knowledge,
although neither of them always distinguished the bare outline
or form from the substance of truth; and both of them had to be
content with an abstraction of science which was not yet realized. 
He was the greatest metaphysical genius whom the world has seen;
and in him, more than in any other ancient thinker, the germs of future
knowledge are contained.  The sciences of logic and psychology,
which have supplied so many instruments of thought to after-ages, are based
upon the analyses of Socrates and Plato.  The principles of definition,
the law of contradiction, the fallacy of arguing in a circle,
the distinction between the essence and accidents of a thing or notion,
between means and ends, between causes and conditions; also the division
of the mind into the rational, concupiscent, and irascible elements,
or of pleasures and desires into necessary and unnecessary--
these and other great forms of thought are all of them to be found
in the Republic, and were probably first invented by Plato. 
The greatest of all logical truths, and the one of which writers
on philosophy are most apt to lose sight, the difference between
words and things, has been most strenuously insisted on by him,
although he has not always avoided the confusion of them in his
own writings.  But he does not bind up truth in logical formulae,--
logic is still veiled in metaphysics; and the science which he
imagines to "contemplate all truth and all existence" is very unlike
the doctrine of the syllogism which Aristotle claims to have
discovered.

Neither must we forget that the Republic is but the third part
of a still larger design which was to have included an ideal
history of Athens, as well as a political and physical philosophy. 
The fragment of the Critias has given birth to a world-famous fiction,
second only in importance to the tale of Troy and the legend of Arthur;
and is said as a fact to have inspired some of the early navigators
of the sixteenth century.  This mythical tale, of which the subject
was a history of the wars of the Athenians against the Island
of Atlantis, is supposed to be founded upon an unfinished poem
of Solon, to which it would have stood in the same relation
as the writings of the logographers to the poems of Homer. 
It would have told of a struggle for Liberty, intended to represent
the conflict of Persia and Hellas.  We may judge from the noble
commencement of the Timaeus, from the fragment of the Critias itself,
and from the third book of the Laws, in what manner Plato would
have treated this high argument.  We can only guess why the great
design was abandoned; perhaps because Plato became sensible of some
incongruity in a fictitious history, or because he had lost his
interest in it, or because advancing years forbade the completion
of it; and we may please ourselves with the fancy that had this
imaginary narrative ever been finished, we should have found Plato
himself sympathizing with the struggle for Hellenic independence,
singing a hymn of triumph over Marathon and Salamis, perhaps making
the reflection of Herodotus where he contemplates the growth
of the Athenian empire--"How brave a thing is freedom of speech,
which has made the Athenians so far exceed every other state
of Hellas in greatness!" or, more probably, attributing the victory
to the ancient good order of Athens and to the favor of Apollo
and Athene.

Again, Plato may be regarded as the "captain" ('arhchegoz') or leader
of a goodly band of followers; for in the Republic is to be found
the original of Cicero's De Republica, of St. Augustine's City
of God, of the Utopia of Sir Thomas More, and of the numerous
other imaginary States which are framed upon the same model. 
The extent to which Aristotle or the Aristotelian school were indebted
to him in the Politics has been little recognized, and the recognition
is the more necessary because it is not made by Aristotle himself. 
The two philosophers had more in common than they were conscious of;
and probably some elements of Plato remain still undetected in Aristotle. 
In English philosophy too, many affinities may be traced, not only
in the works of the Cambridge Platonists, but in great original
writers like Berkeley or Coleridge, to Plato and his ideas. 
That there is a truth higher than experience, of which the mind bears
witness to herself, is a conviction which in our own generation has
been enthusiastically asserted, and is perhaps gaining ground. 
Of the Greek authors who at the Renaissance brought a new
life into the world Plato has had the greatest influence. 
The Republic of Plato is also the first treatise upon education,
of which the writings of Milton and Locke, Rousseau, Jean Paul,
and Goethe are the legitimate descendants.  Like Dante or Bunyan,
he has a revelation of another life; like Bacon, he is profoundly
impressed with the unity of knowledge; in the early Church
he exercised a real influence on theology, and at the Revival
of Literature on politics.  Even the fragments of his words when
"repeated at second-hand" have in all ages ravished the hearts
of men, who have seen reflected in them their own higher nature. 
He is the father of idealism in philosophy, in politics,
in literature.  And many of the latest conceptions of modern thinkers
and statesmen, such as the unity of knowledge, the reign of law,
and the equality of the sexes, have been anticipated in a dream
by him.

ARGUMENT

The argument of the Republic is the search after Justice, the nature
of which is first hinted at by Cephalus, the just and blameless old man--
then discussed on the basis of proverbial morality by Socrates
and Polemarchus--then caricatured by Thrasymachus and partially
explained by Socrates--reduced to an abstraction by Glaucon
and Adeimantus, and having become invisible in the individual reappears
at length in the ideal State which is constructed by Socrates. 
The first care of the rulers is to be education, of which an outline
is drawn after the old Hellenic model, providing only for an improved
religion and morality, and more simplicity in music and gymnastic,
a manlier strain of poetry, and greater harmony of the individual
and the State.  We are thus led on to the conception of a higher State,
in which "no man calls anything his own," and in which there is neither
"marrying nor giving in marriage," and "kings are philosophers"
and "philosophers are kings;" and there is another and higher education,
intellectual as well as moral and religious, of science as well as of art,
and not of youth only but of the whole of life.  Such a State is
hardly to be realized in this world and would quickly degenerate. 
To the perfect ideal succeeds the government of the soldier
and the lover of honor, this again declining into democracy,
and democracy into tyranny, in an imaginary but regular order having
not much resemblance to the actual facts.  When "the wheel has come
full circle" we do not begin again with a new period of human life;
but we have passed from the best to the worst, and there we end. 
The subject is then changed and the old quarrel of poetry and
philosophy which had been more lightly treated in the earlier books
of the Republic is now resumed and fought out to a conclusion. 
Poetry is discovered to be an imitation thrice removed from the truth,
and Homer, as well as the dramatic poets, having been condemned
as an imitator, is sent into banishment along with them. 
And the idea of the State is supplemented by the revelation of a
future life.

The division into books, like all similar divisions, is probably later
than the age of Plato.  The natural divisions are five in number;--( 1)
Book I and the first half of Book II down to the paragraph beginning,
"I had always admired the genius of Glaucon and Adeimantus,"
which is introductory; the first book containing a refutation
of the popular and sophistical notions of justice, and concluding,
like some of the earlier Dialogues, without arriving at any
definite result.  To this is appended a restatement of the nature
of justice according to common opinion, and an answer is demanded
to the question--What is justice, stripped of appearances? 
The second division (2) includes the remainder of the second and
the whole of the third and fourth books, which are mainly occupied
with the construction of the first State and the first education. 
The third division (3) consists of the fifth, sixth, and seventh books,
in which philosophy rather than justice is the subject of inquiry,
and the second State is constructed on principles of communism
and ruled by philosophers, and the contemplation of the idea
of good takes the place of the social and political virtues. 
In the eighth and ninth books (4) the perversions of States and of
the individuals who correspond to them are reviewed in succession;
and the nature of pleasure and the principle of tyranny are
further analyzed in the individual man.  The tenth book (5) is
the conclusion of the whole, in which the relations of philosophy
to poetry are finally determined, and the happiness of the citizens
in this life, which has now been assured, is crowned by the vision
of another.

Or a more general division into two parts may be adopted; the first
(Books I - IV) containing the description of a State framed generally
in accordance with Hellenic notions of religion and morality,
while in the second (Books V - X) the Hellenic State is transformed
into an ideal kingdom of philosophy, of which all other governments
are the perversions.  These two points of view are really opposed,
and the opposition is only veiled by the genius of Plato. 
The Republic, like the Phaedrus, is an imperfect whole; the higher light
of philosophy breaks through the regularity of the Hellenic temple,
which at last fades away into the heavens.  Whether this imperfection
of structure arises from an enlargement of the plan; or from the
imperfect reconcilement in the writer's own mind of the struggling
elements of thought which are now first brought together by him;
or, perhaps, from the composition of the work at different times--
are questions, like the similar question about the Iliad and the Odyssey,
which are worth asking, but which cannot have a distinct answer. 
In the age of Plato there was no regular mode of publication,
and an author would have the less scruple in altering or adding
to a work which was known only to a few of his friends. 
There is no absurdity in supposing that he may have laid his
labors aside for a time, or turned from one work to another;
and such interruptions would be more likely to occur in the case
of a long than of a short writing.  In all attempts to determine
the chronological he order of the Platonic writings on internal evidence,
this uncertainty about any single Dialogue being composed at one time
is a disturbing element, which must be admitted to affect longer works,
such as the Republic and the Laws, more than shorter ones. 
But, on the other hand, the seeming discrepancies of the Republic
may only arise out of the discordant elements which the philosopher
has attempted to unite in a single whole, perhaps without being
himself able to recognize the inconsistency which is obvious to us. 
For there is a judgment of after ages which few great writers have
ever been able to anticipate for themselves.  They do not perceive
the want of connection in their own writings, or the gaps in their
systems which are visible enough to those who come after them. 
In the beginnings of literature and philosophy, amid the first
efforts of thought and language, more inconsistencies occur than now,
when the paths of speculation are well worn and the meaning of words
precisely defined.  For consistency, too, is the growth of time;
and some of the greatest creations of the human mind have been wanting
in unity.  Tried by this test, several of the Platonic Dialogues,
according to our modern ideas, appear to be defective, but the
deficiency is no proof that they were composed at different times
or by different hands.  And the supposition that the Republic was
written uninterruptedly and by a continuous effort is in some degree
confirmed by the numerous references from one part of the work
to another.

The second title, "Concerning Justice," is not the one by
which the Republic is quoted, either by Aristotle or generally
in antiquity, and, like the other second titles of the Platonic
Dialogues, may therefore be assumed to be of later date. 
Morgenstern and others have asked whether the definition of justice,
which is the professed aim, or the construction of the State
is the principal argument of the work.  The answer is,
that the two blend in one, and are two faces of the same truth;
for justice is the order of the State, and the State is the visible
embodiment of justice under the conditions of human society. 
The one is the soul and the other is the body, and the Greek ideal
of the State, as of the individual, is a fair mind in a fair body. 
In Hegelian phraseology the State is the reality of which justice
is the ideal.  Or, described in Christian language, the kingdom
of God is within, and yet develops into a Church or external kingdom;
"the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens,"
is reduced to the proportions of an earthly building.  Or, to use
a Platonic image, justice and the State are the warp and the woof
which run through the whole texture.  And when the constitution
of the State is completed, the conception of justice is not dismissed,
but reappears under the same or different names throughout the work,
both as the inner law of the individual soul, and finally
as the principle of rewards and punishments in another life. 
The virtues are based on justice, of which common honesty in buying
and selling is the shadow, and justice is based on the idea of good,
which is the harmony of the world, and is reflected both in
the institutions of States and in motions of the heavenly bodies. 
The Timaeus, which takes up the political rather than the ethical
side of the Republic, and is chiefly occupied with hypotheses
concerning the outward world, yet contains many indications that
the same law is supposed to reign over the State, over nature,
and over man.

Too much, however, has been made of this question both in ancient
and in modern times.  There is a stage of criticism in which
all works, whether of nature or of art, are referred to design. 
Now in ancient writings, and indeed in literature generally,
there remains often a large element which was not comprehended
in the original design.  For the plan grows under the author's hand;
new thoughts occur to him in the act of writing; he has not worked
out the argument to the end before he begins.  The reader who seeks
to find some one idea under which the whole may be conceived,
must necessarily seize on the vaguest and most general. 
Thus Stallbaum, who is dissatisfied with the ordinary explanations
of the argument of the Republic, imagines himself to have found
the true argument "in the representation of human life in a State
perfected by justice and governed according to the idea of good." 
There may be some use in such general descriptions, but they can
hardly be said to express the design of the writer.  The truth is,
that we may as well speak of many designs as of one; nor need
anything be excluded from the plan of a great work to which the mind
is naturally led by the association of ideas, and which does not
interfere with the general purpose.  What kind or degree of unity
is to be sought after in a building, in the plastic arts, in poetry,
in prose, is a problem which has to be determined relatively to the
subject-matter. To Plato himself, the inquiry "what was the intention
of the writer," or "what was the principal argument of the Republic"
would have been hardly intelligible, and therefore had better be at
once dismissed.

Is not the Republic the vehicle of three or four great truths which,
to Plato's own mind, are most naturally represented in the form
of the State?  Just as in the Jewish prophets the reign of Messiah,
or "the day of the Lord," or the suffering Servant or people
of God, or the "Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings"
only convey, to us at least, their great spiritual ideals,
so through the Greek State Plato reveals to us his own thoughts
about divine perfection, which is the idea of good--like the sun
in the visible world;--about human perfection, which is justice--
about education beginning in youth and continuing in later years--
about poets and sophists and tyrants who are the false teachers
and evil rulers of mankind--about "the world" which is the embodiment
of them--about a kingdom which exists nowhere upon earth but is
laid up in heaven to be the pattern and rule of human life. 
No such inspired creation is at unity with itself, any more
than the clouds of heaven when the sun pierces through them. 
Every shade of light and dark, of truth, and of fiction which is
the veil of truth, is allowable in a work of philosophical imagination. 
It is not all on the same plane; it easily passes from ideas
to myths and fancies, from facts to figures of speech.  It is not
prose but poetry, at least a great part of it, and ought not to be
judged by the rules of logic or the probabilities of history. 
The writer is not fashioning his ideas into an artistic whole;
they take possession of him and are too much for him. 
We have no need therefore to discuss whether a State such as Plato
has conceived is practicable or not, or whether the outward form
or the inward life came first into the mind of the writer. 
For the practicability of his ideas has nothing to do with their truth;
and the highest thoughts to which he attains may be truly said to bear
the greatest "marks of design"--justice more than the external frame-work
of the State, the idea of good more than justice.  The great science
of dialectic or the organization of ideas has no real content;
but is only a type of the method or spirit in which the higher knowledge
is to be pursued by the spectator of all time and all existence. 
It is in the fifth, sixth, and seventh books that Plato reaches
the "summit of speculation," and these, although they fail to satisfy
the requirements of a modern thinker, may therefore be regarded
as the most important, as they are also the most original, portions of
the work.

It is not necessary to discuss at length a minor question which has
been raised by Boeckh, respecting the imaginary date at which
the conversation was held (the year 411 B. C. which is proposed
by him will do as well as any other); for a writer of fiction,
and especially a writer who, like Plato, is notoriously careless
of chronology, only aims at general probability.  Whether all the persons
mentioned in the Republic could ever have met at any one time is
not a difficulty which would have occurred to an Athenian reading
the work forty years later, or to Plato himself at the time of writing
(any more than to Shakespeare respecting one of his own dramas);
and need not greatly trouble us now.  Yet this may be a question having
no answer "which is still worth asking," because the investigation
shows that we can not argue historically from the dates in Plato;
it would be useless therefore to waste time in inventing far-fetched
reconcilements of them in order avoid chronological difficulties,
such, for example, as the conjecture of C. F. Hermann, that Glaucon
and Adeimantus are not the brothers but the uncles of Plato,
or the fancy of Stallbaum that Plato intentionally left anachronisms
indicating the dates at which some of his Dialogues were written.

CHARACTERS

The principal characters in the Republic are Cephalus,
Polemarchus, Thrasymachus, Socrates, Glaucon, and Adeimantus. 
Cephalus appears in the introduction only, Polemarchus drops at
the end of the first argument, and Thrasymachus is reduced to silence
at the close of the first book.  The main discussion is carried on
by Socrates, Glaucon, and Adeimantus.  Among the company are Lysias
(the orator) and Euthydemus, the sons of Cephalus and brothers
of Polemarchus, an unknown Charmantides--these are mute auditors;
also there is Cleitophon, who once interrupts, where, as in the Dialogue
which bears his name, he appears as the friend and ally of Thrasymachus.

Cephalus, the patriarch of house, has been appropriately engaged in
offering a sacrifice.  He is the pattern of an old man who has almost
done with life, and is at peace with himself and with all mankind. 
He feels that he is drawing nearer to the world below, and seems
to linger around the memory of the past.  He is eager that Socrates
should come to visit him, fond of the poetry of the last generation,
happy in the consciousness of a well-spent life, glad at having
escaped from the tyranny of youthful lusts.  His love of conversation,
his affection, his indifference to riches, even his garrulity,
are interesting traits of character.  He is not one of those who have
nothing to say, because their whole mind has been absorbed in making money. 
Yet he acknowledges that riches have the advantage of placing men
above the temptation to dishonesty or falsehood.  The respectful
attention shown to him by Socrates, whose love of conversation,
no less than the mission imposed upon him by the Oracle, leads him
to ask questions of all men, young and old alike, should also be noted. 
Who better suited to raise the question of justice than Cephalus,
whose life might seem to be the expression of it?  The moderation
with which old age is pictured by Cephalus as a very tolerable
portion of existence is characteristic, not only of him, but of Greek
feeling generally, and contrasts with the exaggeration of Cicero
in the De Senectute.  The evening of life is described by Plato
in the most expressive manner, yet with the fewest possible touches. 
As Cicero remarks (Ep. ad Attic.  iv.  16), the aged Cephalus would
have been out of place in the discussion which follows, and which he
could neither have understood nor taken part in without a violation of
dramatic propriety.

His "son and heir" Polemarchus has the frankness and impetuousness
of youth; he is for detaining Socrates by force in the opening scene,
and will not "let him off" on the subject of women and children. 
Like Cephalus, he is limited in his point of view, and represents
the proverbial stage of morality which has rules of life rather
than principles; and he quotes Simonides as his father had quoted Pindar. 
But after this he has no more to say; the answers which he
makes are only elicited from him by the dialectic of Socrates. 
He has not yet experienced the influence of the Sophists like Glaucon
and Adeimantus, nor is he sensible of the necessity of refuting them;
he belongs to the pre-Socratic or pre-dialectical age. 
He is incapable of arguing, and is bewildered by Socrates
to such a degree that he does not know what he is saying. 
He is made to admit that justice is a thief, and that the virtues
follow the analogy of the arts.  From his brother Lysias we learn
that he fell a victim to the Thirty Tyrants, but no allusion
is here made to his fate, nor to the circumstance that Cephalus
and his family were of Syracusan origin, and had migrated from Thurii
to Athens.

The "Chalcedonian giant," Thrasymachus, of whom we have already heard
in the Phaedrus, is the personification of the Sophists, according to
Plato's conception of them, in some of their worst characteristics. 
He is vain and blustering, refusing to discourse unless he
is paid, fond of making an oration, and hoping thereby to escape
the inevitable Socrates; but a mere child in argument, and unable
to foresee that the next "move" (to use a Platonic expression)
will "shut him up."  He has reached the stage of framing general notions,
and in this respect is in advance of Cephalus and Polemarchus. 
But he is incapable of defending them in a discussion,
and vainly tries to cover his confusion in banter and insolence. 
Whether such doctrines as are attributed to him by Plato were really
held either by him or by any other Sophist is uncertain; in the infancy
of philosophy serious errors about morality might easily grow up--
they are certainly put into the mouths of speakers in Thucydides;
but we are concerned at present with Plato's description of him,
and not with the historical reality.  The inequality of the contest
adds greatly to the humor of the scene.  The pompous and empty Sophist
is utterly helpless in the hands of the great master of dialectic,
who knows how to touch all the springs of vanity and weakness in him. 
He is greatly irritated by the irony of Socrates, but his noisy
and imbecile rage only lays him more and more open to the thrusts
of his assailant.  His determination to cram down their throats,
or put "bodily into their souls" his own words, elicits a cry
of horror from Socrates.  The state of his temper is quite as worthy
of remark as the process of the argument.  Nothing is more amusing
than his complete submission when he has been once thoroughly beaten. 
At first he seems to continue the discussion with reluctance,
but soon with apparent good-will, and he even testifies his
interest at a later stage by one or two occasional remarks. 
When attacked by Glaucon he is humorously protected by Socrates
"as one who has never been his enemy and is now his friend." 
From Cicero and Quintilian and from Aristotle's Rhetoric we learn
that the Sophist whom Plato has made so ridiculous was a man of note
whose writings were preserved in later ages.  The play on his name
which was made by his contemporary Herodicus, "thou wast ever bold
in battle," seems to show that the description of him is not devoid of
verisimilitude.

When Thrasymachus has been silenced, the two principal respondents,
Glaucon and Adeimantus, appear on the scene:  here, as in Greek tragedy,
three actors are introduced.  At first sight the two sons of Ariston
may seem to wear a family likeness, like the two friends Simmias
and Cebes in the Phaedo.  But on a nearer examination of them
the similarity vanishes, and they are seen to be distinct characters. 
Glaucon is the impetuous youth who can "just never have enough of fechting"
(cf. the character of him in Xen.  Mem.  iii.  6); the man of pleasure
who is acquainted with the mysteries of love; the "juvenis qui
gaudet canibus," and who improves the breed of animals; the lover
of art and music who has all the experiences of youthful life. 
He is full of quickness and penetration, piercing easily below
the clumsy platitudes of Thrasymachus to the real difficulty;
he turns out to the light the seamy side of human life, and yet
does not lose faith in the just and true.  It is Glaucon who seizes
what may be termed the ludicrous relation of the philosopher
to the world, to whom a state of simplicity is "a city of pigs,"
who is always prepared with a jest when the argument offers him
an opportunity, and who is ever ready to second the humor of Socrates
and to appreciate the ridiculous, whether in the connoisseurs of music,
or in the lovers of theatricals, or in the fantastic behavior of
the citizens of democracy.  His weaknesses are several times alluded
to by Socrates, who, however, will not allow him to be attacked
by his brother Adeimantus.  He is a soldier, and, like Adeimantus,
has been distinguished at the battle of Megara.

The character of Adeimantus is deeper and graver, and the profounder
objections are commonly put into his mouth.  Glaucon is more demonstrative,
and generally opens the game.  Adeimantus pursues the argument further. 
Glaucon has more of the liveliness and quick sympathy of youth;
Adeimantus has the maturer judgment of a grown-up man of the world. 
In the second book, when Glaucon insists that justice and injustice
shall be considered without regard to their consequences,
Adeimantus remarks that they are regarded by mankind in general only
for the sake of their consequences; and in a similar vein of reflection
he urges at the beginning of the fourth book that Socrates falls
in making his citizens happy, and is answered that happiness is not
the first but the second thing, not the direct aim but the indirect
consequence of the good government of a State.  In the discussion
about religion and mythology, Adeimantus is the respondent, but Glaucon
breaks in with a slight jest, and carries on the conversation
in a lighter tone about music and gymnastic to the end of the book. 
It is Adeimantus again who volunteers the criticism of common
sense on the Socratic method of argument, and who refuses to let
Socrates pass lightly over the question of women and children. 
It is Adeimantus who is the respondent in the more argumentative,
as Glaucon in the lighter and more imaginative portions of the Dialogue. 
For example, throughout the greater part of the sixth book, the causes
of the corruption of philosophy and the conception of the idea of
good are discussed with Adeimantus.  Then Glaucon resumes his place
of principal respondent; but he has a difficulty in apprehending
the higher education of Socrates, and makes some false hits in the course
of the discussion.  Once more Adeimantus returns with the allusion
to his brother Glaucon whom he compares to the contentious State;
in the next book he is again superseded, and Glaucon continues to
the end.

Thus in a succession of characters Plato represents the successive stages
of morality, beginning with the Athenian gentleman of the olden time,
who is followed by the practical man of that day regulating his life
by proverbs and saws; to him succeeds the wild generalization of
the Sophists, and lastly come the young disciples of the great teacher,
who know the sophistical arguments but will not be convinced by them,
and desire to go deeper into the nature of things.  These too,
like Cephalus, Polemarchus, Thrasymachus, are clearly distinguished
from one another.  Neither in the Republic, nor in any other Dialogue
of Plato, is a single character repeated.

The delineation of Socrates in the Republic is not wholly consistent. 
In the first book we have more of the real Socrates,
such as he is depicted in the Memorabilia of Xenophon,
in the earliest Dialogues of Plato, and in the Apology. 
He is ironical, provoking, questioning, the old enemy of the Sophists,
ready to put on the mask of Silenus as well as to argue seriously. 
But in the sixth book his enmity towards the Sophists abates;
he acknowledges that they are the representatives rather than
the corrupters of the world.  He also becomes more dogmatic
and constructive, passing beyond the range either of the political
or the speculative ideas of the real Socrates.  In one passage Plato
himself seems to intimate that the time had now come for Socrates,
who had passed his whole life in philosophy, to give his own
opinion and not to be always repeating the notions of other men. 
There is no evidence that either the idea of good or the conception
of a perfect State were comprehended in the Socratic teaching,
though he certainly dwelt on the nature of the universal and
of final causes (cp. Xen.  Mem.  i.  4; Phaedo 97); and a deep
thinker like him in his thirty or forty years of public teaching,
could hardly have falled to touch on the nature of family relations,
for which there is also some positive evidence in the Memorabilia
(Mem. i.  2, 51 foll.) The Socratic method is nominally retained;
and every inference is either put into the mouth of the respondent
or represented as the common discovery of him and Socrates. 
But any one can see that this is a mere form, of which the affectation
grows wearisome as the work advances.  The method of inquiry
has passed into a method of teaching in which by the help of
interlocutors the same thesis is looked at from various points
of view.

The nature of the process is truly characterized by Glaucon,
when he describes himself as a companion who is not good for much
in an investigation, but can see what he is shown, and may,
perhaps, give the answer to a question more fluently than another.

Neither can we be absolutely certain that, Socrates himself taught
the immortality of the soul, which is unknown to his disciple
Glaucon in the Republic; nor is there any reason to suppose
that he used myths or revelations of another world as a vehicle
of instruction, or that he would have banished poetry or have
denounced the Greek mythology.  His favorite oath is retained,
and a slight mention is made of the daemonium, or internal sign,
which is alluded to by Socrates as a phenomenon peculiar to himself. 
A real element of Socratic teaching, which is more prominent
in the Republic than in any of the other Dialogues of Plato,
is the use of example and illustration ('taphorhtika auto
prhospherhontez'): "Let us apply the test of common instances." 
"You," says Adeimantus, ironically, in the sixth book, "are so
unaccustomed to speak in images."  And this use of examples or images,
though truly Socratic in origin, is enlarged by the genius of Plato
into the form of an allegory or parable, which embodies in the concrete
what has been already described, or is about to be described,
in the abstract.  Thus the figure of the cave in Book VII
is a recapitulation of the divisions of knowledge in Book VI. 
The composite animal in Book IX is an allegory of the parts of the soul. 
The noble captain and the ship and the true pilot in Book VI are a
figure of the relation of the people to the philosophers in the State
which has been described.  Other figures, such as the dog in
the second, third, and fourth books, or the marriage of the portionless
maiden in the sixth book, or the drones and wasps in the eighth
and ninth books, also form links of connection in long passages,
or are used to recall previous discussions.

Plato is most true to the character of his master when he describes
him as "not of this world."  And with this representation of him
the ideal State and the other paradoxes of the Republic are quite
in accordance, though they can not be shown to have been speculations
of Socrates.  To him, as to other great teachers both philosophical
and religious, when they looked upward, the world seemed to be
the embodiment of error and evil.  The common sense of mankind has
revolted against this view, or has only partially admitted it. 
And even in Socrates himself the sterner judgment of the multitude
at times passes into a sort of ironical pity or love.  Men in general
are incapable of philosophy, and are therefore at enmity with
the philosopher; but their misunderstanding of him is unavoidable: 
for they have never seen him as he truly is in his own image;
they are only acquainted with artificial systems possessing no
native force of truth--words which admit of many applications. 
Their leaders have nothing to measure with, and are therefore ignorant
of their own stature.  But they are to be pitied or laughed at,
not to be quarrelled with; they mean well with their nostrums,
if they could only learn that they are cutting off a Hydra's head. 
This moderation towards those who are in error is one of
the most characteristic features of Socrates in the Republic. 
In all the different representations of Socrates, whether of Xenophon
or Plato, and the differences of the earlier or later Dialogues,
he always retains the character of the unwearied and disinterested
seeker after truth, without which he would have ceased to
be Socrates.

Leaving the characters we may now analyze the contents of the Republic,
and then proceed to consider (1) The general aspects of this Hellenic
ideal of the State, (2) The modern lights in which the thoughts
of Plato may be read.

BOOK I

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

I WENT down yesterday to the Piraeus with Glaucon the son of Ariston,
that I might offer up my prayers to the goddess; and also because I
wanted to see in what manner they would celebrate the festival,
which was a new thing.  I was delighted with the procession
of the inhabitants; but that of the Thracians was equally,
if not more, beautiful.  When we had finished our prayers and
viewed the spectacle, we turned in the direction of the city;
and at that instant Polemarchus the son of Cephalus chanced
to catch sight of us from a distance as we were starting on our
way home, and told his servant to run and bid us wait for him. 
The servant took hold of me by the cloak behind, and said: 
Polemarchus desires you to wait.

I turned round, and asked him where his master was.

There he is, said the youth, coming after you, if you will only wait.

Certainly we will, said Glaucon; and in a few minutes Polemarchus appeared,
and with him Adeimantus, Glaucon's brother, Niceratus the son
of Nicias, and several others who had been at the procession.

SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS - GLAUCON - ADEIMANTUS

Polemarchus said to me:  I perceive, Socrates, that you and our
companion are already on your way to the city.

You are not far wrong, I said.

But do you see, he rejoined, how many we are?

Of course.

And are you stronger than all these? for if not, you will have
to remain where you are.

May there not be the alternative, I said, that we may persuade you
to let us go?

But can you persuade us, if we refuse to listen to you? he said.

Certainly not, replied Glaucon.

Then we are not going to listen; of that you may be assured.

Adeimantus added:  Has no one told you of the torch-race on horseback
in honour of the goddess which will take place in the evening?

With horses!  I replied:  That is a novelty.  Will horsemen carry
torches and pass them one to another during the race?

Yes, said Polemarchus, and not only so, but a festival will
he celebrated at night, which you certainly ought to see. 
Let us rise soon after supper and see this festival; there will be
a gathering of young men, and we will have a good talk.  Stay then,
and do not be perverse.

Glaucon said:  I suppose, since you insist, that we must.

Very good, I replied.

GLAUCON - CEPHALUS - SOCRATES

Accordingly we went with Polemarchus to his house; and there we
found his brothers Lysias and Euthydemus, and with them Thrasymachus
the Chalcedonian, Charmantides the Paeanian, and Cleitophon the son
of Aristonymus.  There too was Cephalus the father of Polemarchus,
whom I had not seen for a long time, and I thought him very much aged. 
He was seated on a cushioned chair, and had a garland on his head,
for he had been sacrificing in the court; and there were some other chairs
in the room arranged in a semicircle, upon which we sat down by him. 
He saluted me eagerly, and then he said:--

You don't come to see me, Socrates, as often as you ought: 
If I were still able to go and see you I would not ask you
to come to me.  But at my age I can hardly get to the city,
and therefore you should come oftener to the Piraeus.  For let
me tell you, that the more the pleasures of the body fade away,
the greater to me is the pleasure and charm of conversation. 
Do not then deny my request, but make our house your resort and keep
company with these young men; we are old friends, and you will be
quite at home with us.

I replied:  There is nothing which for my part I like better,
Cephalus, than conversing with aged men; for I regard them
as travellers who have gone a journey which I too may have to go,
and of whom I ought to enquire, whether the way is smooth and easy,
or rugged and difficult.  And this is a question which I should
like to ask of you who have arrived at that time which the poets
call the `threshold of old age'--Is life harder towards the end,
or what report do you give of it?

I will tell you, Socrates, he said, what my own feeling is. 
Men of my age flock together; we are birds of a feather,
as the old proverb says; and at our meetings the tale of my
acquaintance commonly is--I cannot eat, I cannot drink;
the pleasures of youth and love are fled away:  there was a good
time once, but now that is gone, and life is no longer life. 
Some complain of the slights which are put upon them by relations,
and they will tell you sadly of how many evils their old age is
the cause.  But to me, Socrates, these complainers seem to blame
that which is not really in fault.  For if old age were the cause,
I too being old, and every other old man, would have felt as they do. 
But this is not my own experience, nor that of others whom I have known. 
How well I remember the aged poet Sophocles, when in answer to
the question, How does love suit with age, Sophocles,--are you still
the man you were?  Peace, he replied; most gladly have I escaped
the thing of which you speak; I feel as if I had escaped from a mad
and furious master.  His words have often occurred to my mind since,
and they seem as good to me now as at the time when he uttered them. 
For certainly old age has a great sense of calm and freedom;
when the passions relax their hold, then, as Sophocles says,
we are freed from the grasp not of one mad master only, but of many. 
The truth is, Socrates, that these regrets, and also the complaints
about relations, are to be attributed to the same cause, which is
not old age, but men's characters and tempers; for he who is
of a calm and happy nature will hardly feel the pressure of age,
but to him who is of an opposite disposition youth and age are equally
a burden.

I listened in admiration, and wanting to draw him out, that he
might go on--Yes, Cephalus, I said:  but I rather suspect that
people in general are not convinced by you when you speak thus;
they think that old age sits lightly upon you, not because of your
happy disposition, but because you are rich, and wealth is well
known to be a great comforter.

You are right, he replied; they are not convinced:  and there is
something in what they say; not, however, so much as they imagine. 
I might answer them as Themistocles answered the Seriphian who was
abusing him and saying that he was famous, not for his own merits
but because he was an Athenian:  `If you had been a native of my
country or I of yours, neither of us would have been famous.' 
And to those who are not rich and are impatient of old age,
the same reply may be made; for to the good poor man old age
cannot be a light burden, nor can a bad rich man ever have peace
with himself.

May I ask, Cephalus, whether your fortune was for the most part
inherited or acquired by you?

Acquired!  Socrates; do you want to know how much I acquired?  In the art
of making money I have been midway between my father and grandfather: 
for my grandfather, whose name I bear, doubled and trebled the value
of his patrimony, that which he inherited being much what I possess now;
but my father Lysanias reduced the property below what it is at present: 
and I shall be satisfied if I leave to these my sons not less
but a little more than I received.

That was why I asked you the question, I replied, because I see
that you are indifferent about money, which is a characteristic
rather of those who have inherited their fortunes than of those
who have acquired them; the makers of fortunes have a second love
of money as a creation of their own, resembling the affection
of authors for their own poems, or of parents for their children,
besides that natural love of it for the sake of use and profit which
is common to them and all men.  And hence they are very bad company,
for they can talk about nothing but the praises of wealth. 
That is true, he said.

Yes, that is very true, but may I ask another question? 
What do you consider to be the greatest blessing which you have
reaped from your wealth?

One, he said, of which I could not expect easily to convince others. 
For let me tell you, Socrates, that when a man thinks himself to be
near death, fears and cares enter into his mind which he never had before;
the tales of a world below and the punishment which is exacted
there of deeds done here were once a laughing matter to him,
but now he is tormented with the thought that they may be true: 
either from the weakness of age, or because he is now drawing
nearer to that other place, he has a clearer view of these things;
suspicions and alarms crowd thickly upon him, and he begins
to reflect and consider what wrongs he has done to others. 
And when he finds that the sum of his transgressions is great he
will many a time like a child start up in his sleep for fear,
and he is filled with dark forebodings.  But to him who is conscious
of no sin, sweet hope, as Pindar charmingly says, is the kind nurse of
his age:

          Hope, he says, cherishes the soul of him who lives in
          justice and holiness and is the nurse of his age and the
          companion of his journey;--hope which is mightiest to sway
          the restless soul of man.

How admirable are his words!  And the great blessing of riches, I do not
say to every man, but to a good man, is, that he has had no occasion
to deceive or to defraud others, either intentionally or unintentionally;
and when he departs to the world below he is not in any apprehension
about offerings due to the gods or debts which he owes to men. 
Now to this peace of mind the possession of wealth greatly contributes;
and therefore I say, that, setting one thing against another,
of the many advantages which wealth has to give, to a man of sense this
is in my opinion the greatest.

Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what is it?--
to speak the truth and to pay your debts--no more than this? 
And even to this are there not exceptions?  Suppose that a friend
when in his right mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for them
when he is not in his right mind, ought I to give them back to him? 
No one would say that I ought or that I should be right in doing so,
any more than they would say that I ought always to speak the truth to one
who is in his condition.

You are quite right, he replied.

But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is not
a correct definition of justice.

CEPHALUS - SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS

Quite correct, Socrates, if Simonides is to be believed,
said Polemarchus interposing.

I fear, said Cephalus, that I must go now, for I have to look
after the sacrifices, and I hand over the argument to Polemarchus
and the company.

Is not Polemarchus your heir?  I said.

To be sure, he answered, and went away laughing to the sacrifices.

SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS

Tell me then, O thou heir of the argument, what did Simonides say,
and according to you truly say, about justice?

He said that the repayment of a debt is just, and in saying so he
appears to me to be right.

I should be sorry to doubt the word of such a wise and inspired man,
but his meaning, though probably clear to you, is the reverse of
clear to me.  For he certainly does not mean, as we were now saying
that I ought to return a return a deposit of arms or of anything
else to one who asks for it when he is not in his right senses;
and yet a deposit cannot be denied to be a debt.

True.

Then when the person who asks me is not in his right mind I am
by no means to make the return?

Certainly not.

When Simonides said that the repayment of a debt was justice,
he did not mean to include that case?

Certainly not; for he thinks that a friend ought always to do
good to a friend and never evil.

You mean that the return of a deposit of gold which is to the injury
of the receiver, if the two parties are friends, is not the repayment
of a debt,--that is what you would imagine him to say?

Yes.

And are enemies also to receive what we owe to them?

To be sure, he said, they are to receive what we owe them, and an enemy,
as I take it, owes to an enemy that which is due or proper to him--
that is to say, evil.

Simonides, then, after the manner of poets, would seem to have
spoken darkly of the nature of justice; for he really meant to say
that justice is the giving to each man what is proper to him,
and this he termed a debt.

That must have been his meaning, he said.

By heaven!  I replied; and if we asked him what due or proper thing
is given by medicine, and to whom, what answer do you think that he
would make to us?

He would surely reply that medicine gives drugs and meat and drink
to human bodies.

And what due or proper thing is given by cookery, and to what?

Seasoning to food.

And what is that which justice gives, and to whom?

If, Socrates, we are to be guided at all
by the analogy of the preceding instances,
then justice is the art which gives good to friends and evil to enemies.

That is his meaning then?

I think so.

And who is best able to do good to his friends and evil to his
enemies in time of sickness?

The physician.

Or when they are on a voyage, amid the perils of the sea?

The pilot.

And in what sort of actions or with a view to what result is the just
man most able to do harm to his enemy and good to his friends?

In going to war against the one and in making alliances with the other.

But when a man is well, my dear Polemarchus, there is no need
of a physician?

No.

And he who is not on a voyage has no need of a pilot?

No.

Then in time of peace justice will be of no use?

I am very far from thinking so.

You think that justice may be of use in peace as well as in war?

Yes.

Like husbandry for the acquisition of corn?

Yes.

Or like shoemaking for the acquisition of shoes,--that is what you mean?

Yes.

And what similar use or power of acquisition has justice in time
of peace?

In contracts, Socrates, justice is of use.

And by contracts you mean partnerships?

Exactly.

But is the just man or the skilful player a more useful and better
partner at a game of draughts?

The skilful player.

And in the laying of bricks and stones is the just man a more useful
or better partner than the builder?

Quite the reverse.

Then in what sort of partnership is the just man a better partner
than the harp-player, as in playing the harp the harp-player
is certainly a better partner than the just man?

In a money partnership.

Yes, Polemarchus, but surely not in the use of money; for you do not
want a just man to be your counsellor the purchase or sale of a horse;
a man who is knowing about horses would be better for that,
would he not?

Certainly.

And when you want to buy a ship, the shipwright or the pilot would
be better?

True.

Then what is that joint use of silver or gold in which the just man
is to be preferred?

When you want a deposit to be kept safely.

You mean when money is not wanted, but allowed to lie?

Precisely.

That is to say, justice is useful when money is useless?

That is the inference.

And when you want to keep a pruning-hook safe, then justice is useful
to the individual and to the state; but when you want to use it,
then the art of the vine-dresser?

Clearly.

And when you want to keep a shield or a lyre, and not to use them,
you would say that justice is useful; but when you want to use them,
then the art of the soldier or of the musician?

Certainly.

And so of all the other things;--justice is useful when they
are useless, and useless when they are useful?

That is the inference.

Then justice is not good for much.  But let us consider this
further point:  Is not he who can best strike a blow in a boxing
match or in any kind of fighting best able to ward off a blow?

Certainly.

And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease
is best able to create one?

True.

And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march
upon the enemy?

Certainly.

Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?

That, I suppose, is to be inferred.

Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing it.

That is implied in the argument.

Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. 
And this is a lesson which I suspect you must have learnt out of Homer;
for he, speaking of Autolycus, the maternal grandfather of Odysseus,
who is a favourite of his, affirms that

          He was excellent above all men in theft and perjury.

And so, you and Homer and Simonides are agreed that justice is
an art of theft; to be practised however `for the good of friends
and for the harm of enemies,'--that was what you were saying?

No, certainly not that, though I do not now know what I did say;
but I still stand by the latter words.

Well, there is another question:  By friends and enemies do we mean
those who are so really, or only in seeming?

Surely, he said, a man may be expected to love those whom he
thinks good, and to hate those whom he thinks evil.

Yes, but do not persons often err about good and evil: 
many who are not good seem to be so, and conversely?

That is true.

Then to them the good will be enemies and the evil
will be their friends?  True.

And in that case they will be right in doing good to the evil
and evil to the good?

Clearly.

But the good are just and would not do an injustice?

True.

Then according to your argument it is just to injure those who do
no wrong?

Nay, Socrates; the doctrine is immoral.

Then I suppose that we ought to do good to the just and harm
to the unjust?

I like that better.

But see the consequence:--Many a man who is ignorant of human nature
has friends who are bad friends, and in that case he ought to do harm
to them; and he has good enemies whom he ought to benefit; but, if so,
we shall be saying the very opposite of that which we affirmed
to be the meaning of Simonides.

Very true, he said:  and I think that we had better correct an error
into which we seem to have fallen in the use of the words `friend'
and `enemy.'

What was the error, Polemarchus?  I asked.

We assumed that he is a friend who seems to be or who is thought good.

And how is the error to be corrected?

We should rather say that he is a friend who is, as well
as seems, good; and that he who seems only, and is not good,
only seems to be and is not a friend; and of an enemy the same may be said.

You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies?

Yes.

And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do
good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: 
It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm
to our enemies when they are evil?

Yes, that appears to me to be the truth.

But ought the just to injure any one at all?

Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies.

When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated?

The latter.

Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses,
not of dogs?

Yes, of horses.

And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not
of horses?

Of course.

And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is
the proper virtue of man?

Certainly.

And that human virtue is justice?

To be sure.

Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?

That is the result.

But can the musician by his art make men unmusical?

Certainly not.

Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen?

Impossible.

And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general
can the good by virtue make them bad?

Assuredly not.

Any more than heat can produce cold?

It cannot.

Or drought moisture?

Clearly not.

Nor can the good harm any one?

Impossible.

And the just is the good?

Certainly.

Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man,
but of the opposite, who is the unjust?

I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.

Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of debts,
and that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends, and evil
the debt which he owes to his enemies,--to say this is not wise;
for it is not true, if, as has been clearly shown, the injuring of
another can be in no case just.

I agree with you, said Polemarchus.

Then you and I are prepared to take up arms against any one
who attributes such a saying to Simonides or Bias or Pittacus,
or any other wise man or seer?

I am quite ready to do battle at your side, he said.

Shall I tell you whose I believe the saying to be?

Whose?

I believe that Periander or Perdiccas or Xerxes or Ismenias
the Theban, or some other rich and mighty man, who had a great
opinion of his own power, was the first to say that justice
is `doing good to your friends and harm to your enemies.'

Most true, he said.

Yes, I said; but if this definition of justice also breaks down,
what other can be offered?

Several times in the course of the discussion Thrasymachus had made
an attempt to get the argument into his own hands, and had been
put down by the rest of the company, who wanted to hear the end. 
But when Polemarchus and I had done speaking and there was a pause,
he could no longer hold his peace; and, gathering himself up,
he came at us like a wild beast, seeking to devour us.  We were quite
panic-stricken at the sight of him.

SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS - THRASYMACHUS

He roared out to the whole company:  What folly.  Socrates, has taken
possession of you all?  And why, sillybillies, do you knock under to
one another?  I say that if you want really to know what justice is,
you should not only ask but answer, and you should not seek honour
to yourself from the refutation of an opponent, but have your own answer;
for there is many a one who can ask and cannot answer.  And now I
will not have you say that justice is duty or advantage or profit
or gain or interest, for this sort of nonsense will not do for me;
I must have clearness and accuracy.

I was panic-stricken at his words, and could not look at him
without trembling.  Indeed I believe that if I had not fixed my eye
upon him, I should have been struck dumb:  but when I saw his fury rising,
I looked at him first, and was therefore able to reply to him.

Thrasymachus, I said, with a quiver, don't be hard upon us. 
Polemarchus and I may have been guilty of a little mistake in
the argument, but I can assure you that the error was not intentional. 
If we were seeking for a piece of gold, you would not imagine
that we were `knocking under to one another,' and so losing our
chance of finding it.  And why, when we are seeking for justice,
a thing more precious than many pieces of gold, do you say that we
are weakly yielding to one another and not doing our utmost
to get at the truth?  Nay, my good friend, we are most willing
and anxious to do so, but the fact is that we cannot.  And if so,
you people who know all things should pity us and not be angry
with us.

How characteristic of Socrates! he replied, with a bitter laugh;--
that's your ironical style!  Did I not foresee--have I not already
told you, that whatever he was asked he would refuse to answer,
and try irony or any other shuffle, in order that he might
avoid answering?

You are a philosopher, Thrasymachus, I replied, and well
know that if you ask a person what numbers make up twelve,
taking care to prohibit him whom you ask from answering twice six,
or three times four, or six times two, or four times three,
`for this sort of nonsense will not do for me,'--then obviously,
that is your way of putting the question, no one can answer you. 
But suppose that he were to retort, `Thrasymachus, what do you mean? 
If one of these numbers which you interdict be the true answer
to the question, am I falsely to say some other number which is
not the right one?--is that your meaning?' --How would you
answer him?

Just as if the two cases were at all alike! he said.

Why should they not be?  I replied; and even if they are not,
but only appear to be so to the person who is asked, ought he not
to say what he thinks, whether you and I forbid him or not?

I presume then that you are going to make one of the interdicted answers?

I dare say that I may, notwithstanding the danger, if upon reflection
I approve of any of them.

But what if I give you an answer about justice other and better,
he said, than any of these?  What do you deserve to have done
to you?

Done to me!--as becomes the ignorant, I must learn from the wise--
that is what I deserve to have done to me.

What, and no payment! a pleasant notion!

I will pay when I have the money, I replied.

SOCRATES - THRASYMACHUS - GLAUCON

But you have, Socrates, said Glaucon:  and you, Thrasymachus, need be
under no anxiety about money, for we will all make a contribution
for Socrates.

Yes, he replied, and then Socrates will do as he always does--
refuse to answer himself, but take and pull to pieces the answer
of some one else.

Why, my good friend, I said, how can any one answer who knows,
and says that he knows, just nothing; and who, even if he has some faint
notions of his own, is told by a man of authority not to utter them? 
The natural thing is, that the speaker should be some one like
yourself who professes to know and can tell what he knows. 
Will you then kindly answer, for the edification of the company
and of myself ?

Glaucon and the rest of the company joined in my request and Thrasymachus,
as any one might see, was in reality eager to speak; for he thought
that he had an excellent answer, and would distinguish himself. 
But at first he to insist on my answering; at length he consented
to begin.  Behold, he said, the wisdom of Socrates; he refuses
to teach himself, and goes about learning of others, to whom he
never even says thank you.

That I learn of others, I replied, is quite true; but that I am ungrateful
I wholly deny.  Money I have none, and therefore I pay in praise,
which is all I have:  and how ready I am to praise any one who appears
to me to speak well you will very soon find out when you answer;
for I expect that you will answer well.

Listen, then, he said; I proclaim that justice is nothing else
than the interest of the stronger.  And now why do you not me? 
But of course you won't.

Let me first understand you, I replied.  justice, as you say, is the
interest of the stronger.  What, Thrasymachus, is the meaning of this? 
You cannot mean to say that because Polydamas, the pancratiast,
is stronger than we are, and finds the eating of beef conducive
to his bodily strength, that to eat beef is therefore equally
for our good who are weaker than he is, and right and just for us?

That's abominable of you, Socrates; you take the words in the sense
which is most damaging to the argument.

Not at all, my good sir, I said; I am trying to understand them;
and I wish that you would be a little clearer.

Well, he said, have you never heard that forms of government differ;
there are tyrannies, and there are democracies, and there
are aristocracies?

Yes, I know.

And the government is the ruling power in each state?

Certainly.

And the different forms of government make laws democratical,
aristocratical, tyrannical, with a view to their several interests;
and these laws, which are made by them for their own interests,
are the justice which they deliver to their subjects, and him who
transgresses them they punish as a breaker of the law, and unjust. 
And that is what I mean when I say that in all states there is the same
principle of justice, which is the interest of the government;
and as the government must be supposed to have power, the only reasonable
conclusion is, that everywhere there is one principle of justice,
which is the interest of the stronger.

Now I understand you, I said; and whether you are right or not I
will try to discover.  But let me remark, that in defining justice you
have yourself used the word `interest' which you forbade me to use. 
It is true, however, that in your definition the words `of the stronger'
are added.

A small addition, you must allow, he said.

Great or small, never mind about that:  we must first enquire whether
what you are saying is the truth.  Now we are both agreed that justice
is interest of some sort, but you go on to say `of the stronger';
about this addition I am not so sure, and must therefore consider further.

Proceed.

I will; and first tell me, Do you admit that it is just or subjects
to obey their rulers?

I do.

But are the rulers of states absolutely infallible, or are they
sometimes liable to err?

To be sure, he replied, they are liable to err.

Then in making their laws they may sometimes make them rightly,
and sometimes not?

True.

When they make them rightly, they make them agreeably to their interest;
when they are mistaken, contrary to their interest; you admit that?

Yes.

And the laws which they make must be obeyed by their subjects,--
and that is what you call justice?

Doubtless.

Then justice, according to your argument, is not only obedience
to the interest of the stronger but the reverse?

What is that you are saying? he asked.

I am only repeating what you are saying, I believe.  But let us consider: 
Have we not admitted that the rulers may be mistaken about their own
interest in what they command, and also that to obey them is justice? 
Has not that been admitted?

Yes.

Then you must also have acknowledged justice not to be for the interest
of the stronger, when the rulers unintentionally command things
to be done which are to their own injury.  For if, as you say,
justice is the obedience which the subject renders to their commands,
in that case, O wisest of men, is there any escape from the conclusion
that the weaker are commanded to do, not what is for the interest,
but what is for the injury of the stronger?

Nothing can be clearer, Socrates, said Polemarchus.

SOCRATES - CLEITOPHON - POLEMARCHUS - THRASYMACHUS

Yes, said Cleitophon, interposing, if you are allowed to be his witness.

But there is no need of any witness, said Polemarchus, for Thrasymachus
himself acknowledges that rulers may sometimes command what is not
for their own interest, and that for subjects to obey them is justice.

Yes, Polemarchus,--Thrasymachus said that for subjects to do
what was commanded by their rulers is just.

Yes, Cleitophon, but he also said that justice is the interest
of the stronger, and, while admitting both these propositions,
he further acknowledged that the stronger may command the weaker
who are his subjects to do what is not for his own interest;
whence follows that justice is the injury quite as much as the interest
of the stronger.

But, said Cleitophon, he meant by the interest of the stronger
what the stronger thought to be his interest,--this was what
the weaker had to do; and this was affirmed by him to be justice.

Those were not his words, rejoined Polemarchus.

SOCRATES - THRASYMACHUS

Never mind, I replied, if he now says that they are, let us
accept his statement.  Tell me, Thrasymachus, I said, did you
mean by justice what the stronger thought to be his interest,
whether really so or not?

Certainly not, he said.  Do you suppose that I call him who is
mistaken the stronger at the time when he is mistaken?

Yes, I said, my impression was that you did so, when you admitted
that the ruler was not infallible but might be sometimes mistaken.

You argue like an informer, Socrates.  Do you mean, for example,
that he who is mistaken about the sick is a physician in that he is
mistaken? or that he who errs in arithmetic or grammar is an arithmetician
or grammarian at the me when he is making the mistake, in respect
of the mistake?  True, we say that the physician or arithmetician
or grammarian has made a mistake, but this is only a way of speaking;
for the fact is that neither the grammarian nor any other person
of skill ever makes a mistake in so far as he is what his name implies;
they none of them err unless their skill fails them, and then
they cease to be skilled artists.  No artist or sage or ruler
errs at the time when he is what his name implies; though he is
commonly said to err, and I adopted the common mode of speaking. 
But to be perfectly accurate, since you are such a lover of accuracy,
we should say that the ruler, in so far as he is the ruler,
is unerring, and, being unerring, always commands that which is for his
own interest; and the subject is required to execute his commands;
and therefore, as I said at first and now repeat, justice is the interest
of the stronger.

Indeed, Thrasymachus, and do I really appear to you to argue
like an informer?

Certainly, he replied.

And you suppose that I ask these questions with any design
of injuring you in the argument?

Nay, he replied, `suppose' is not the word--I know it; but you will
be found out, and by sheer force of argument you will never prevail.

I shall not make the attempt, my dear man; but to avoid any misunderstanding
occurring between us in future, let me ask, in what sense do you
speak of a ruler or stronger whose interest, as you were saying,
he being the superior, it is just that the inferior should execute--
is he a ruler in the popular or in the strict sense of the term?

In the strictest of all senses, he said.  And now cheat and play
the informer if you can; I ask no quarter at your hands. 
But you never will be able, never.

And do you imagine, I said, that I am such a madman as to try
and cheat, Thrasymachus?  I might as well shave a lion.

Why, he said, you made the attempt a minute ago, and you failed.

Enough, I said, of these civilities.  It will be better that I should
ask you a question:  Is the physician, taken in that strict sense
of which you are speaking, a healer of the sick or a maker of money? 
And remember that I am now speaking of the true physician.

A healer of the sick, he replied.

And the pilot--that is to say, the true pilot--is he a captain
of sailors or a mere sailor?

A captain of sailors.

The circumstance that he sails in the ship is not to be taken
into account; neither is he to be called a sailor; the name pilot
by which he is distinguished has nothing to do with sailing,
but is significant of his skill and of his authority over the sailors.

Very true, he said.

Now, I said, every art has an interest?

Certainly.

For which the art has to consider and provide?

Yes, that is the aim of art.

And the interest of any art is the perfection of it--this and
nothing else?

What do you mean?

I mean what I may illustrate negatively by the example of the body. 
Suppose you were to ask me whether the body is self-sufficing
or has wants, I should reply:  Certainly the body has wants;
for the body may be ill and require to be cured, and has therefore
interests to which the art of medicine ministers; and this is
the origin and intention of medicine, as you will acknowledge. 
Am I not right?

Quite right, he replied.

But is the art of medicine or any other art faulty or deficient
in any quality in the same way that the eye may be deficient
in sight or the ear fail of hearing, and therefore requires
another art to provide for the interests of seeing and hearing--
has art in itself, I say, any similar liability to fault or defect,
and does every art require another supplementary art to provide
for its interests, and that another and another without end? 
Or have the arts to look only after their own interests?  Or have they
no need either of themselves or of another?--having no faults or defects,
they have no need to correct them, either by the exercise of their
own art or of any other; they have only to consider the interest
of their subject-matter. For every art remains pure and faultless
while remaining true--that is to say, while perfect and unimpaired. 
Take the words in your precise sense, and tell me whether I am
not right."

Yes, clearly.

Then medicine does not consider the interest of medicine,
but the interest of the body?

True, he said.

Nor does the art of horsemanship consider the interests
of the art of horsemanship, but the interests of the horse;
neither do any other arts care for themselves, for they have no needs;
they care only for that which is the subject of their art?

True, he said.

But surely, Thrasymachus, the arts are the superiors and rulers
of their own subjects?

To this he assented with a good deal of reluctance.

Then, I said, no science or art considers or enjoins the interest
of the stronger or superior, but only the interest of the subject
and weaker?

He made an attempt to contest this proposition also, but finally acquiesced.

Then, I continued, no physician, in so far as he is a physician,
considers his own good in what he prescribes, but the good
of his patient; for the true physician is also a ruler having
the human body as a subject, and is not a mere money-maker;
that has been admitted?

Yes.

And the pilot likewise, in the strict sense of the term, is a ruler
of sailors and not a mere sailor?

That has been admitted.

And such a pilot and ruler will provide and prescribe for the interest
of the sailor who is under him, and not for his own or the ruler's interest?

He gave a reluctant `Yes.'

Then, I said, Thrasymachus, there is no one in any rule who, in so far
as he is a ruler, considers or enjoins what is for his own interest,
but always what is for the interest of his subject or suitable to his art;
to that he looks, and that alone he considers in everything which he
says and does.

When we had got to this point in the argument, and every one saw
that the definition of justice had been completely upset, Thrasymachus,
instead of replying to me, said:  Tell me, Socrates, have you got a nurse?

Why do you ask such a question, I said, when you ought rather
to be answering?

Because she leaves you to snivel, and never wipes your nose: 
she has not even taught you to know the shepherd from the sheep.

What makes you say that?  I replied.

Because you fancy that the shepherd or neatherd fattens of tends the sheep
or oxen with a view to their own good and not to the good of himself
or his master; and you further imagine that the rulers of states,
if they are true rulers, never think of their subjects as sheep,
and that they are not studying their own advantage day and night. 
Oh, no; and so entirely astray are you in your ideas about the just
and unjust as not even to know that justice and the just are in
reality another's good; that is to say, the interest of the ruler
and stronger, and the loss of the subject and servant; and injustice
the opposite; for the unjust is lord over the truly simple and just: 
he is the stronger, and his subjects do what is for his interest,
and minister to his happiness, which is very far from being their own. 
Consider further, most foolish Socrates, that the just is always a loser
in comparison with the unjust.  First of all, in private contracts: 
wherever the unjust is the partner of the just you will find that,
when the partnership is dissolved, the unjust man has always more
and the just less.  Secondly, in their dealings with the State: 
when there is an income tax, the just man will pay more and
the unjust less on the same amount of income; and when there is
anything to be received the one gains nothing and the other much. 
Observe also what happens when they take an office; there is the just
man neglecting his affairs and perhaps suffering other losses,
and getting nothing out of the public, because he is just;
moreover he is hated by his friends and acquaintance for refusing
to serve them in unlawful ways.  But all this is reversed in the case
of the unjust man.  I am speaking, as before, of injustice on a
large scale in which the advantage of the unjust is more apparent;
and my meaning will be most clearly seen if we turn to that highest
form of injustice in which the criminal is the happiest of men,
and the sufferers or those who refuse to do injustice are the
most miserable--that is to say tyranny, which by fraud and force takes
away the property of others, not little by little but wholesale;
comprehending in one, things sacred as well as profane, private and public;
for which acts of wrong, if he were detected perpetrating any one
of them singly, he would be punished and incur great disgrace--
they who do such wrong in particular cases are called robbers
of temples, and man-stealers and burglars and swindlers and thieves. 
But when a man besides taking away the money of the citizens has
made slaves of them, then, instead of these names of reproach,
he is termed happy and blessed, not only by the citizens but by all
who hear of his having achieved the consummation of injustice. 
For mankind censure injustice, fearing that they may be the victims
of it and not because they shrink from committing it.  And thus,
as I have shown, Socrates, injustice, when on a sufficient scale,
has more strength and freedom and mastery than justice; and, as I said
at first, justice is the interest of the stronger, whereas injustice
is a man's own profit and interest.

Thrasymachus, when he had thus spoken, having, like a bathman,
deluged our ears with his words, had a mind to go away.  But the company
would not let him; they insisted that he should remain and defend
his position; and I myself added my own humble request that he
would not leave us.  Thrasymachus, I said to him, excellent man,
how suggestive are your remarks!  And are you going to run away
before you have fairly taught or learned whether they are true or not? 
Is the attempt to determine the way of man's life so small a matter
in your eyes--to determine how life may be passed by each one of us
to the greatest advantage?

And do I differ from you, he said, as to the importance of the enquiry?

You appear rather, I replied, to have no care or thought about us,
Thrasymachus--whether we live better or worse from not knowing what you
say you know, is to you a matter of indifference.  Prithee, friend,
do not keep your knowledge to yourself; we are a large party;
and any benefit which you confer upon us will be amply rewarded. 
For my own part I openly declare that I am not convinced, and that I
do not believe injustice to be more gainful than justice, even if
uncontrolled and allowed to have free play.  For, granting that there
may be an unjust man who is able to commit injustice either by fraud
or force, still this does not convince me of the superior advantage
of injustice, and there may be others who are in the same predicament
with myself.  Perhaps we may be wrong; if so, you in your wisdom
should convince us that we are mistaken in preferring justice to injustice.

And how am I to convince you, he said, if you are not already
convinced by what I have just said; what more can I do for you? 
Would you have me put the proof bodily into your souls?

Heaven forbid!  I said; I would only ask you to be consistent;
or, if you change, change openly and let there be no deception. 
For I must remark, Thrasymachus, if you will recall what was previously said,
that although you began by defining the true physician in an exact sense,
you did not observe a like exactness when speaking of the shepherd;
you thought that the shepherd as a shepherd tends the sheep not
with a view to their own good, but like a mere diner or banqueter
with a view to the pleasures of the table; or, again, as a trader
for sale in the market, and not as a shepherd.  Yet surely the art
of the shepherd is concerned only with the good of his subjects;
he has only to provide the best for them, since the perfection of the art
is already ensured whenever all the requirements of it are satisfied. 
And that was what I was saying just now about the ruler.  I conceived
that the art of the ruler, considered as ruler, whether in a state
or in private life, could only regard the good of his flock or subjects;
whereas you seem to think that the rulers in states, that is to say,
the true rulers, like being in authority.

Think!  Nay, I am sure of it.

Then why in the case of lesser offices do men never take them
willingly without payment, unless under the idea that they govern
for the advantage not of themselves but of others?  Let me ask you
a question:  Are not the several arts different, by reason of their
each having a separate function?  And, my dear illustrious friend,
do say what you think, that we may make a little progress.

Yes, that is the difference, he replied.

And each art gives us a particular good and not merely a general one--
medicine, for example, gives us health; navigation, safety at sea,
and so on?

Yes, he said.

And the art of payment has the special function of giving pay: 
but we do not confuse this with other arts, any more than
the art of the pilot is to be confused with the art of medicine,
because the health of the pilot may be improved by a sea voyage. 
You would not be inclined to say, would you, that navigation is
the art of medicine, at least if we are to adopt your exact use
of language?

Certainly not.

Or because a man is in good health when he receives pay you would
not say that the art of payment is medicine?

I should say not.

Nor would you say that medicine is the art of receiving pay
because a man takes fees when he is engaged in healing?

Certainly not.

And we have admitted, I said, that the good of each art is specially
confined to the art?

Yes.

Then, if there be any good which all artists have in common,
that is to be attributed to something of which they all have
the common use?

True, he replied.

And when the artist is benefited by receiving pay the advantage
is gained by an additional use of the art of pay, which is not
the art professed by him?

He gave a reluctant assent to this.

Then the pay is not derived by the several artists from their
respective arts.  But the truth is, that while the art of medicine
gives health, and the art of the builder builds a house, another art
attends them which is the art of pay.  The various arts may be doing
their own business and benefiting that over which they preside,
but would the artist receive any benefit from his art unless he
were paid as well?

I suppose not.

But does he therefore confer no benefit when he works for nothing?

Certainly, he confers a benefit.

Then now, Thrasymachus, there is no longer any doubt that neither
arts nor governments provide for their own interests; but, as we
were before saying, they rule and provide for the interests
of their subjects who are the weaker and not the stronger--
to their good they attend and not to the good of the superior.

And this is the reason, my dear Thrasymachus, why, as I was just
now saying, no one is willing to govern; because no one likes
to take in hand the reformation of evils which are not his
concern without remuneration.  For, in the execution of his work,
and in giving his orders to another, the true artist does
not regard his own interest, but always that of his subjects;
and therefore in order that rulers may be willing to rule,
they must be paid in one of three modes of payment:  money, or honour,
or a penalty for refusing.

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

What do you mean, Socrates? said Glaucon.  The first two modes
of payment are intelligible enough, but what the penalty is I
do not understand, or how a penalty can be a payment.

You mean that you do not understand the nature of this payment
which to the best men is the great inducement to rule?  Of course you
know that ambition and avarice are held to be, as indeed they are,
a disgrace?

Very true.

And for this reason, I said, money and honour have no attraction for them;
good men do not wish to be openly demanding payment for governing
and so to get the name of hirelings, nor by secretly helping
themselves out of the public revenues to get the name of thieves. 
And not being ambitious they do not care about honour. 
Wherefore necessity must be laid upon them, and they must
be induced to serve from the fear of punishment.  And this,
as I imagine, is the reason why the forwardness to take office,
instead of waiting to be compelled, has been deemed dishonourable. 
Now the worst part of the punishment is that he who refuses
to rule is liable to be ruled by one who is worse than himself. 
And the fear of this, as I conceive, induces the good to take office,
not because they would, but because they cannot help--not under the idea
that they are going to have any benefit or enjoyment themselves,
but as a necessity, and because they are not able to commit
the task of ruling to any one who is better than themselves,
or indeed as good.  For there is reason to think that if a city
were composed entirely of good men, then to avoid office would be
as much an object of contention as to obtain office is at present;
then we should have plain proof that the true ruler is not meant
by nature to regard his own interest, but that of his subjects;
and every one who knew this would choose rather to receive
a benefit from another than to have the trouble of conferring one. 
So far am I from agreeing with Thrasymachus that justice is the
interest of the stronger.  This latter question need not be further
discussed at present; but when Thrasymachus says that the life
of the unjust is more advantageous than that of the just, his new
statement appears to me to be of a far more serious character. 
Which of us has spoken truly?  And which sort of life, Glaucon,
do you prefer?

I for my part deem the life of the just to be the more advantageous,
he answered.

Did you hear all the advantages of the unjust which Thrasymachus
was rehearsing?

Yes, I heard him, he replied, but he has not convinced me.

Then shall we try to find some way of convincing him, if we can,
that he is saying what is not true?

Most certainly, he replied.

If, I said, he makes a set speech and we make another recounting
all the advantages of being just, and he answers and we rejoin,
there must be a numbering and measuring of the goods which are claimed
on either side, and in the end we shall want judges to decide;
but if we proceed in our enquiry as we lately did, by making admissions
to one another, we shall unite the offices of judge and advocate
in our own persons.

Very good, he said.

And which method do I understand you to prefer?  I said.

That which you propose.

Well, then, Thrasymachus, I said, suppose you begin at the beginning
and answer me.  You say that perfect injustice is more gainful
than perfect justice?

SOCRATES - GLAUCON - THRASYMACHUS

Yes, that is what I say, and I have given you my reasons.

And what is your view about them?  Would you call one of them
virtue and the other vice?

Certainly.

I suppose that you would call justice virtue and injustice vice?

What a charming notion!  So likely too, seeing that I affirm
injustice to be profitable and justice not.

What else then would you say?

The opposite, he replied.

And would you call justice vice?

No, I would rather say sublime simplicity.

Then would you call injustice malignity?

No; I would rather say discretion.

And do the unjust appear to you to be wise and good?

Yes, he said; at any rate those of them who are able to be perfectly
unjust, and who have the power of subduing states and nations;
but perhaps you imagine me to be talking of cutpurses.

Even this profession if undetected has advantages, though they
are not to be compared with those of which I was just now speaking.

I do not think that I misapprehend your meaning, Thrasymachus, I replied;
but still I cannot hear without amazement that you class injustice
with wisdom and virtue, and justice with the opposite.

Certainly I do so class them.

Now, I said, you are on more substantial and almost unanswerable ground;
for if the injustice which you were maintaining to be profitable
had been admitted by you as by others to be vice and deformity,
an answer might have been given to you on received principles;
but now I perceive that you will call injustice honourable and strong,
and to the unjust you will attribute all the qualities which were
attributed by us before to the just, seeing that you do not hesitate to
rank injustice with wisdom and virtue.

You have guessed most infallibly, he replied.

Then I certainly ought not to shrink from going through
with the argument so long as I have reason to think that you,
Thrasymachus, are speaking your real mind; for I do believe
that you are now in earnest and are not amusing yourself at our expense.

I may be in earnest or not, but what is that to you?--to refute
the argument is your business.

Very true, I said; that is what I have to do:  But will you
be so good as answer yet one more question?  Does the just man
try to gain any advantage over the just?

Far otherwise; if he did would not be the simple, amusing creature
which he is.

And would he try to go beyond just action?

He would not.

And how would he regard the attempt to gain an advantage over the unjust;
would that be considered by him as just or unjust?

He would think it just, and would try to gain the advantage;
but he would not be able.

Whether he would or would not be able, I said, is not to the point. 
My question is only whether the just man, while refusing to have
more than another just man, would wish and claim to have more than
the unjust?

Yes, he would.

And what of the unjust--does he claim to have more than the just
man and to do more than is just

Of course, he said, for he claims to have more than all men.

And the unjust man will strive and struggle to obtain more than
the unjust man or action, in order that he may have more than all?

True.

We may put the matter thus, I said--the just does not desire
more than his like but more than his unlike, whereas the unjust
desires more than both his like and his unlike?

Nothing, he said, can be better than that statement.

And the unjust is good and wise, and the just is neither?

Good again, he said.

And is not the unjust like the wise and good and the just unlike them?

Of course, he said, he who is of a certain nature, is like those
who are of a certain nature; he who is not, not.

Each of them, I said, is such as his like is?

Certainly, he replied.

Very good, Thrasymachus, I said; and now to take the case of the arts: 
you would admit that one man is a musician and another not a musician?

Yes.

And which is wise and which is foolish?

Clearly the musician is wise, and he who is not a musician is foolish.

And he is good in as far as he is wise, and bad in as far as he
is foolish?

Yes.

And you would say the same sort of thing of the physician?

Yes.

And do you think, my excellent friend, that a musician when he
adjusts the lyre would desire or claim to exceed or go beyond
a musician in the tightening and loosening the strings?

I do not think that he would.

But he would claim to exceed the non-musician?

Of course.

And what would you say of the physician?  In prescribing meats
and drinks would he wish to go beyond another physician or beyond
the practice of medicine?

He would not.

But he would wish to go beyond the non-physician?

Yes.

And about knowledge and ignorance in general; see whether you think
that any man who has knowledge ever would wish to have the choice
of saying or doing more than another man who has knowledge. 
Would he not rather say or do the same as his like in the same case?

That, I suppose, can hardly be denied.

And what of the ignorant? would he not desire to have more than
either the knowing or the ignorant?

I dare say.

And the knowing is wise?

Yes.

And the wise is good?

True.

Then the wise and good will not desire to gain more than his like,
but more than his unlike and opposite?

I suppose so.

Whereas the bad and ignorant will desire to gain more than both?

Yes.

But did we not say, Thrasymachus, that the unjust goes beyond
both his like and unlike?  Were not these your words?  They were.

They were.

And you also said that the lust will not go beyond his like but his unlike?

Yes.

Then the just is like the wise and good, and the unjust like the evil
and ignorant?

That is the inference.

And each of them is such as his like is?

That was admitted.

Then the just has turned out to be wise and good and the unjust
evil and ignorant.

Thrasymachus made all these admissions, not fluently,
as I repeat them, but with extreme reluctance; it was a hot
summer's day, and the perspiration poured from him in torrents;
and then I saw what I had never seen before, Thrasymachus blushing. 
As we were now agreed that justice was virtue and wisdom,
and injustice vice and ignorance, I proceeded to another point:

Well, I said, Thrasymachus, that matter is now settled; but were we
not also saying that injustice had strength; do you remember?

Yes, I remember, he said, but do not suppose that I approve of what
you are saying or have no answer; if however I were to answer,
you would be quite certain to accuse me of haranguing; therefore either
permit me to have my say out, or if you would rather ask, do so,
and I will answer `Very good,' as they say to story-telling old women,
and will nod `Yes' and `No.'

Certainly not, I said, if contrary to your real opinion.

Yes, he said, I will, to please you, since you will not let me speak. 
What else would you have?

Nothing in the world, I said; and if you are so disposed I will ask
and you shall answer.

Proceed.

Then I will repeat the question which I asked before,
in order that our examination of the relative nature of justice
and injustice may be carried on regularly.  A statement was made
that injustice is stronger and more powerful than justice,
but now justice, having been identified with wisdom and virtue,
is easily shown to be stronger than injustice, if injustice
is ignorance; this can no longer be questioned by any one. 
But I want to view the matter, Thrasymachus, in a different way: 
You would not deny that a state may be unjust and may be unjustly
attempting to enslave other states, or may have already enslaved them,
and may be holding many of them in subjection?

True, he replied; and I will add the best and perfectly unjust
state will be most likely to do so.

I know, I said, that such was your position; but what I would further
consider is, whether this power which is possessed by the superior
state can exist or be exercised without justice.

If you are right in you view, and justice is wisdom, then only
with justice; but if I am right, then without justice.

I am delighted, Thrasymachus, to see you not only nodding assent
and dissent, but making answers which are quite excellent.

That is out of civility to you, he replied.

You are very kind, I said; and would you have the goodness
also to inform me, whether you think that a state, or an army,
or a band of robbers and thieves, or any other gang of evil-doers
could act at all if they injured one another?

No indeed, he said, they could not.

But if they abstained from injuring one another, then they might
act together better?

Yes.

And this is because injustice creates divisions and hatreds
and fighting, and justice imparts harmony and friendship;
is not that true, Thrasymachus?

I agree, he said, because I do not wish to quarrel with you.

How good of you, I said; but I should like to know also whether injustice,
having this tendency to arouse hatred, wherever existing,
among slaves or among freemen, will not make them hate one another
and set them at variance and render them incapable of common action?

Certainly.

And even if injustice be found in two only, will they not quarrel
and fight, and become enemies to one another and to the just

They will.

And suppose injustice abiding in a single person, would your wisdom
say that she loses or that she retains her natural power?

Let us assume that she retains her power.

Yet is not the power which injustice exercises of such a nature
that wherever she takes up her abode, whether in a city,
in an army, in a family, or in any other body, that body is,
to begin with, rendered incapable of united action by reason
of sedition and distraction; and does it not become its own enemy
and at variance with all that opposes it, and with the just? 
Is not this the case?

Yes, certainly.

And is not injustice equally fatal when existing in a single person;
in the first place rendering him incapable of action because he
is not at unity with himself, and in the second place making him
an enemy to himself and the just?  Is not that true, Thrasymachus?

Yes.

And O my friend, I said, surely the gods are just?

Granted that they are.

But if so, the unjust will be the enemy of the gods, and the just
will be their friend?

Feast away in triumph, and take your fill of the argument;
I will not oppose you, lest I should displease the company.

Well then, proceed with your answers, and let me have the remainder
of my repast.  For we have already shown that the just are clearly
wiser and better and abler than the unjust, and that the unjust
are incapable of common action; nay ing at more, that to speak as we
did of men who are evil acting at any time vigorously together,
is not strictly true, for if they had been perfectly evil, they would
have laid hands upon one another; but it is evident that there must
have been some remnant of justice in them, which enabled them to combine;
if there had not been they would have injured one another as well
as their victims; they were but half--villains in their enterprises;
for had they been whole villains, and utterly unjust, they would
have been utterly incapable of action.  That, as I believe,
is the truth of the matter, and not what you said at first. 
But whether the just have a better and happier life than the unjust
is a further question which we also proposed to consider.  I think
that they have, and for the reasons which to have given; but still
I should like to examine further, for no light matter is at stake,
nothing less than the rule of human life.

Proceed.

I will proceed by asking a question:  Would you not say that a horse
has some end?

I should.

And the end or use of a horse or of anything would be that which could
not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished, by any other thing?

I do not understand, he said.

Let me explain:  Can you see, except with the eye?

Certainly not.

Or hear, except with the ear?

No.

These then may be truly said to be the ends of these organs?

They may.

But you can cut off a vine-branch with a dagger or with a chisel,
and in many other ways?

Of course.

And yet not so well as with a pruning-hook made for the purpose?

True.

May we not say that this is the end of a pruning-hook?

We may.

Then now I think you will have no difficulty in understanding my
meaning when I asked the question whether the end of anything would
be that which could not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished,
by any other thing?

I understand your meaning, he said, and assent.

And that to which an end is appointed has also an excellence? 
Need I ask again whether the eye has an end?

It has.

And has not the eye an excellence?

Yes.

And the ear has an end and an excellence also?

True.

And the same is true of all other things; they have each of them
an end and a special excellence?

That is so.

Well, and can the eyes fulfil their end if they are wanting
in their own proper excellence and have a defect instead?

How can they, he said, if they are blind and cannot see?

You mean to say, if they have lost their proper excellence,
which is sight; but I have not arrived at that point yet. 
I would rather ask the question more generally, and only enquire
whether the things which fulfil their ends fulfil them by their own
proper excellence, and fall of fulfilling them by their own defect?

Certainly, he replied.

I might say the same of the ears; when deprived of their own proper
excellence they cannot fulfil their end?

True.

And the same observation will apply to all other things?

I agree.

Well; and has not the soul an end which nothing else can fulfil?
for example, to superintend and command and deliberate and the like. 
Are not these functions proper to the soul, and can they rightly be
assigned to any other?

To no other.

And is not life to be reckoned among the ends of the soul?

Assuredly, he said.

And has not the soul an excellence also?

Yes.

And can she or can she not fulfil her own ends when deprived
of that excellence?

She cannot.

Then an evil soul must necessarily be an evil ruler and superintendent,
and the good soul a good ruler?

Yes, necessarily.

And we have admitted that justice is the excellence of the soul,
and injustice the defect of the soul?

That has been admitted.

Then the just soul and the just man will live well, and the unjust
man will live ill?

That is what your argument proves.

And he who lives well is blessed and happy, and he who lives ill
the reverse of happy?

Certainly.

Then the just is happy, and the unjust miserable?

So be it.

But happiness and not misery is profitable.

Of course.

Then, my blessed Thrasymachus, injustice can never be more profitable
than justice.

Let this, Socrates, he said, be your entertainment at the Bendidea.

For which I am indebted to you, I said, now that you have grown
gentle towards me and have left off scolding.  Nevertheless, I have
not been well entertained; but that was my own fault and not yours. 
As an epicure snatches a taste of every dish which is successively
brought to table, he not having allowed himself time to enjoy
the one before, so have I gone from one subject to another without
having discovered what I sought at first, the nature of justice. 
I left that enquiry and turned away to consider whether justice is
virtue and wisdom or evil and folly; and when there arose a further
question about the comparative advantages of justice and injustice,
I could not refrain from passing on to that.  And the result
of the whole discussion has been that I know nothing at all. 
For I know not what justice is, and therefore I am not likely to know
whether it is or is not a virtue, nor can I say whether the just man
is happy or unhappy.

BOOK II

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

WITH these words I was thinking that I had made an end of the discussion;
but the end, in truth, proved to be only a beginning.  For Glaucon,
who is always the most pugnacious of men, was dissatisfied
at Thrasymachus' retirement; he wanted to have the battle out. 
So he said to me:  Socrates, do you wish really to persuade us,
or only to seem to have persuaded us, that to be just is always better
than to be unjust?

I should wish really to persuade you, I replied, if I could.

Then you certainly have not succeeded.  Let me ask you now:--How would
you arrange goods--are there not some which we welcome for their
own sakes, and independently of their consequences, as, for example,
harmless pleasures and enjoyments, which delight us at the time,
although nothing follows from them?

I agree in thinking that there is such a class, I replied.

Is there not also a second class of goods, such as knowledge,
sight, health, which are desirable not only in themselves,
but also for their results?

Certainly, I said.

And would you not recognize a third class, such as gymnastic,
and the care of the sick, and the physician's art; also the various ways
of money-making--these do us good but we regard them as disagreeable;
and no one would choose them for their own sakes, but only for the sake
of some reward or result which flows from them?

There is, I said, this third class also.  But why do you ask?

Because I want to know in which of the three classes you would
place justice?

In the highest class, I replied,--among those goods which he
who would be happy desires both for their own sake and for the sake
of their results.

Then the many are of another mind; they think that justice
is to be reckoned in the troublesome class, among goods which
are to be pursued for the sake of rewards and of reputation,
but in themselves are disagreeable and rather to be avoided.

I know, I said, that this is their manner of thinking, and that
this was the thesis which Thrasymachus was maintaining just now,
when he censured justice and praised injustice.  But I am too stupid
to be convinced by him.

I wish, he said, that you would hear me as well as him, and then I shall
see whether you and I agree.  For Thrasymachus seems to me, like a snake,
to have been charmed by your voice sooner than he ought to have been;
but to my mind the nature of justice and injustice have not yet been
made clear.  Setting aside their rewards and results, I want to know
what they are in themselves, and how they inwardly work in the soul. 
If you, please, then, I will revive the argument of Thrasymachus. 
And first I will speak of the nature and origin of justice according
to the common view of them.  Secondly, I will show that all men
who practise justice do so against their will, of necessity,
but not as a good.  And thirdly, I will argue that there is reason
in this view, for the life of the unjust is after all better far
than the life of the just--if what they say is true, Socrates,
since I myself am not of their opinion.  But still I acknowledge
that I am perplexed when I hear the voices of Thrasymachus
and myriads of others dinning in my ears; and, on the other hand,
I have never yet heard the superiority of justice to injustice
maintained by any one in a satisfactory way.  I want to hear justice
praised in respect of itself; then I shall be satisfied, and you
are the person from whom I think that I am most likely to hear this;
and therefore I will praise the unjust life to the utmost of my power,
and my manner of speaking will indicate the manner in which I
desire to hear you too praising justice and censuring injustice. 
Will you say whether you approve of my proposal?

Indeed I do; nor can I imagine any theme about which a man of sense
would oftener wish to converse.

I am delighted, he replied, to hear you say so, and shall begin
by speaking, as I proposed, of the nature and origin of justice.

GLAUCON

They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer
injustice, evil; but that the evil is greater than the good. 
And so when men have both done and suffered injustice and have had
experience of both, not being able to avoid the one and obtain
the other, they think that they had better agree among themselves
to have neither; hence there arise laws and mutual covenants;
and that which is ordained by law is termed by them lawful and just. 
This they affirm to be the origin and nature of justice;--it is a mean
or compromise, between the best of all, which is to do injustice
and not be punished, and the worst of all, which is to suffer injustice
without the power of retaliation; and justice, being at a middle point
between the two, is tolerated not as a good, but as the lesser evil,
and honoured by reason of the inability of men to do injustice. 
For no man who is worthy to be called a man would ever submit to such
an agreement if he were able to resist; he would be mad if he did. 
Such is the received account, Socrates, of the nature and origin
of justice.

Now that those who practise justice do so involuntarily and because
they have not the power to be unjust will best appear if we
imagine something of this kind:  having given both to the just
and the unjust power to do what they will, let us watch and see
whither desire will lead them; then we shall discover in the very
act the just and unjust man to be proceeding along the same road,
following their interest, which all natures deem to be their good,
and are only diverted into the path of justice by the force of law. 
The liberty which we are supposing may be most completely
given to them in the form of such a power as is said to have
been possessed by Gyges the ancestor of Croesus the Lydian. 
According to the tradition, Gyges was a shepherd in the service
of the king of Lydia; there was a great storm, and an earthquake made
an opening in the earth at the place where he was feeding his flock. 
Amazed at the sight, he descended into the opening, where,
among other marvels, he beheld a hollow brazen horse, having doors,
at which he stooping and looking in saw a dead body of stature,
as appeared to him, more than human, and having nothing on but a
gold ring; this he took from the finger of the dead and reascended. 
Now the shepherds met together, according to custom, that they
might send their monthly report about the flocks to the king;
into their assembly he came having the ring on his finger, and as he
was sitting among them he chanced to turn the collet of the ring inside
his hand, when instantly he became invisible to the rest of the company
and they began to speak of him as if he were no longer present. 
He was astonished at this, and again touching the ring he turned
the collet outwards and reappeared; he made several trials of the ring,
and always with the same result-when he turned the collet inwards he
became invisible, when outwards he reappeared.  Whereupon he contrived
to be chosen one of the messengers who were sent to the court;
where as soon as he arrived he seduced the queen, and with her help
conspired against the king and slew him, and took the kingdom. 
Suppose now that there were two such magic rings, and the just put
on one of them and the unjust the other;,no man can be imagined
to be of such an iron nature that he would stand fast in justice. 
No man would keep his hands off what was not his own when he could
safely take what he liked out of the market, or go into houses
and lie with any one at his pleasure, or kill or release from prison
whom he would, and in all respects be like a God among men. 
Then the actions of the just would be as the actions of the unjust;
they would both come at last to the same point.  And this we may
truly affirm to be a great proof that a man is just, not willingly
or because he thinks that justice is any good to him individually,
but of necessity, for wherever any one thinks that he can safely
be unjust, there he is unjust.  For all men believe in their hearts
that injustice is far more profitable to the individual than justice,
and he who argues as I have been supposing, will say that they are right. 
If you could imagine any one obtaining this power of becoming invisible,
and never doing any wrong or touching what was another's, he would
be thought by the lookers-on to be a most wretched idiot, although they
would praise him to one another's faces, and keep up appearances
with one another from a fear that they too might suffer injustice. 
Enough of this.

Now, if we are to form a real judgment of the life of the just and unjust,
we must isolate them; there is no other way; and how is the isolation
to be effected?  I answer:  Let the unjust man be entirely unjust,
and the just man entirely just; nothing is to be taken away from
either of them, and both are to be perfectly furnished for the work
of their respective lives.  First, let the unjust be like other
distinguished masters of craft; like the skilful pilot or physician,
who knows intuitively his own powers and keeps within their limits,
and who, if he fails at any point, is able to recover himself. 
So let the unjust make his unjust attempts in the right way,
and lie hidden if he means to be great in his injustice (he who is
found out is nobody): for the highest reach of injustice is: 
to be deemed just when you are not.  Therefore I say that in
the perfectly unjust man we must assume the most perfect injustice;
there is to be no deduction, but we must allow him, while doing the most
unjust acts, to have acquired the greatest reputation for justice. 
If he have taken a false step he must be able to recover himself;
he must be one who can speak with effect, if any of his deeds
come to light, and who can force his way where force is required
his courage and strength, and command of money and friends. 
And at his side let us place the just man in his nobleness
and simplicity, wishing, as Aeschylus says, to be and not to seem good. 
There must be no seeming, for if he seem to be just he will be
honoured and rewarded, and then we shall not know whether he is just
for the sake of justice or for the sake of honours and rewards;
therefore, let him be clothed in justice only, and have no other covering;
and he must be imagined in a state of life the opposite of the former. 
Let him be the best of men, and let him be thought the worst;
then he will have been put to the proof; and we shall see whether
he will be affected by the fear of infamy and its consequences. 
And let him continue thus to the hour of death; being just and
seeming to be unjust.  When both have reached the uttermost extreme,
the one of justice and the other of injustice, let judgment be given
which of them is the happier of the two.

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

Heavens! my dear Glaucon, I said, how energetically you polish
them up for the decision, first one and then the other, as if they
were two statues.

I do my best, he said.  And now that we know what they are
like there is no difficulty in tracing out the sort of life
which awaits either of them.  This I will proceed to describe;
but as you may think the description a little too coarse, I ask you
to suppose, Socrates, that the words which follow are not mine.--
Let me put them into the mouths of the eulogists of injustice: 
They will tell you that the just man who is thought unjust will
be scourged, racked, bound--will have his eyes burnt out; and, at last,
after suffering every kind of evil, he will be impaled:  Then he
will understand that he ought to seem only, and not to be, just;
the words of Aeschylus may be more truly spoken of the unjust
than of the just.  For the unjust is pursuing a reality; he does
not live with a view to appearances--he wants to be really unjust
and not to seem only:--

          His mind has a soil deep and fertile,
          Out of which spring his prudent counsels.

In the first place, he is thought just, and therefore bears rule
in the city; he can marry whom he will, and give in marriage
to whom he will; also he can trade and deal where he likes,
and always to his own advantage, because he has no misgivings
about injustice and at every contest, whether in public or private,
he gets the better of his antagonists, and gains at their expense,
and is rich, and out of his gains he can benefit his friends,
and harm his enemies; moreover, he can offer sacrifices, and dedicate
gifts to the gods abundantly and magnificently, and can honour the gods
or any man whom he wants to honour in a far better style than the just,
and therefore he is likely to be dearer than they are to the gods. 
And thus, Socrates, gods and men are said to unite in making the life
of the unjust better than the life of the just.

ADEIMANTUS -SOCRATES

I was going to say something in answer to Glaucon, when Adeimantus,
his brother, interposed:  Socrates, he said, you do not suppose
that there is nothing more to be urged?

Why, what else is there?  I answered.

The strongest point of all has not been even mentioned, he replied.

Well, then, according to the proverb, `Let brother help brother'--
if he fails in any part do you assist him; although I must confess
that Glaucon has already said quite enough to lay me in the dust,
and take from me the power of helping justice.

ADEIMANTUS

Nonsense, he replied.  But let me add something more:  There is
another side to Glaucon's argument about the praise and censure
of justice and injustice, which is equally required in order to bring
out what I believe to be his meaning.  Parents and tutors are always
telling their sons and their wards that they are to be just;
but why? not for the sake of justice, but for the sake of character
and reputation; in the hope of obtaining for him who is reputed
just some of those offices, marriages, and the like which Glaucon
has enumerated among the advantages accruing to the unjust from
the reputation of justice.  More, however, is made of appearances
by this class of persons than by the others; for they throw
in the good opinion of the gods, and will tell you of a shower
of benefits which the heavens, as they say, rain upon the pious;
and this accords with the testimony of the noble Hesiod and Homer,
the first of whom says, that the gods make the oaks of the just--

          To hear acorns at their summit, and bees I the middle;
          And the sheep the bowed down bowed the with the their fleeces.

and many other blessings of a like kind are provided for them. 
And Homer has a very similar strain; for he speaks of one whose
fame is--

          As the fame of some blameless king who, like a god,
          Maintains justice to whom the black earth brings forth
          Wheat and barley, whose trees are bowed with fruit,
          And his sheep never fail to bear, and the sea gives him fish.

Still grander are the gifts of heaven which Musaeus and his son
vouchsafe to the just; they take them down into the world below,
where they have the saints lying on couches at a feast,
everlastingly drunk, crowned with garlands; their idea seems to be
that an immortality of drunkenness is the highest meed of virtue. 
Some extend their rewards yet further; the posterity, as they say,
of the faithful and just shall survive to the third and fourth generation. 
This is the style in which they praise justice.  But about the wicked
there is another strain; they bury them in a slough in Hades, and make
them carry water in a sieve; also while they are yet living they bring
them to infamy, and inflict upon them the punishments which Glaucon
described as the portion of the just who are reputed to be unjust;
nothing else does their invention supply.  Such is their manner of
praising the one and censuring the other.

Once more, Socrates, I will ask you to consider another way of speaking
about justice and injustice, which is not confined to the poets,
but is found in prose writers.  The universal voice of mankind
is always declaring that justice and virtue are honourable,
but grievous and toilsome; and that the pleasures of vice and injustice
are easy of attainment, and are only censured by law and opinion. 
They say also that honesty is for the most part less profitable
than dishonesty; and they are quite ready to call wicked men happy,
and to honour them both in public and private when they are rich
or in any other way influential, while they despise and overlook
those who may be weak and poor, even though acknowledging
them to be better than the others.  But most extraordinary
of all is their mode of speaking about virtue and the gods: 
they say that the gods apportion calamity and misery to many good men,
and good and happiness to the wicked.  And mendicant prophets go
to rich men's doors and persuade them that they have a power committed
to them by the gods of making an atonement for a man's own or his
ancestor's sins by sacrifices or charms, with rejoicings and feasts;
and they promise to harm an enemy, whether just or unjust,
at a small cost; with magic arts and incantations binding heaven,
as they say, to execute their will.  And the poets are the authorities
to whom they appeal, now smoothing the path of vice with the words
of Hesiod;--

          Vice may be had in abundance without trouble; the way is smooth
          and her dwelling-place is near. But before virtue the gods have
          set toil,

and a tedious and uphill road:  then citing Homer as a witness
that the gods may be influenced by men; for he also says:

          The gods, too, may he turned from their purpose; and men pray to
          them and avert their wrath by sacrifices and soothing entreaties,
          and by libations and the odour of fat, when they have sinned and
          transgressed.

And they produce a host of books written by Musaeus and Orpheus,
who were children of the Moon and the Muses--that is what they say--
according to which they perform their ritual, and persuade not
only individuals, but whole cities, that expiations and atonements for
sin may be made by sacrifices and amusements which fill a vacant hour,
and are equally at the service of the living and the dead; the latter
sort they call mysteries, and they redeem us from the pains of hell,
but if we neglect them no one knows what awaits us.

He proceeded:  And now when the young hear all this said about
virtue and vice, and the way in which gods and men regard them,
how are their minds likely to be affected, my dear Socrates,--
those of them, I mean, who are quickwitted, and, like bees on the wing,
light on every flower, and from all that they hear are prone to draw
conclusions as to what manner of persons they should be and in
what way they should walk if they would make the best of life? 
Probably the youth will say to himself in the words of Pindar--

          Can I by justice or by crooked ways of deceit ascend a loftier
          tower which may he a fortress to me all my days?

For what men say is that, if I am really just and am not also thought
just profit there is none, but the pain and loss on the other hand
are unmistakable.  But if, though unjust, I acquire the reputation
of justice, a heavenly life is promised to me.  Since then,
as philosophers prove, appearance tyrannizes over truth and is lord
of happiness, to appearance I must devote myself.  I will describe
around me a picture and shadow of virtue to be the vestibule and
exterior of my house; behind I will trail the subtle and crafty fox,
as Archilochus, greatest of sages, recommends.  But I hear some one
exclaiming that the concealment of wickedness is often difficult;
to which I answer, Nothing great is easy.  Nevertheless, the argument
indicates this, if we would be happy, to be the path along which we
should proceed.  With a view to concealment we will establish
secret brotherhoods and political clubs.  And there are professors
of rhetoric who teach the art of persuading courts and assemblies;
and so, partly by persuasion and partly by force, I shall make
unlawful gains and not be punished.  Still I hear a voice saying
that the gods cannot be deceived, neither can they be compelled. 
But what if there are no gods? or, suppose them to have no care
of human things--why in either case should we mind about concealment? 
And even if there are gods, and they do care about us, yet we know
of them only from tradition and the genealogies of the poets;
and these are the very persons who say that they may be influenced
and turned by `sacrifices and soothing entreaties and by offerings.' 
Let us be consistent then, and believe both or neither. 
If the poets speak truly, why then we had better be unjust,
and offer of the fruits of injustice; for if we are just,
although we may escape the vengeance of heaven, we shall lose
the gains of injustice; but, if we are unjust, we shall keep
the gains, and by our sinning and praying, and praying and sinning,
the gods will be propitiated, and we shall not be punished. 
`But there is a world below in which either we or our posterity
will suffer for our unjust deeds.'  Yes, my friend, will be
the reflection, but there are mysteries and atoning deities,
and these have great power.  That is what mighty cities declare;
and the children of the gods, who were their poets and prophets, bear a
like testimony.

On what principle, then, shall we any longer choose justice
rather than the worst injustice? when, if we only unite
the latter with a deceitful regard to appearances, we shall fare
to our mind both with gods and men, in life and after death,
as the most numerous and the highest authorities tell us. 
Knowing all this, Socrates, how can a man who has any superiority
of mind or person or rank or wealth, be willing to honour justice;
or indeed to refrain from laughing when he hears justice praised? 
And even if there should be some one who is able to disprove
the truth of my words, and who is satisfied that justice is best,
still he is not angry with the unjust, but is very ready
to forgive them, because he also knows that men are not just of
their own free will; unless, peradventure, there be some one whom
the divinity within him may have inspired with a hatred of injustice,
or who has attained knowledge of the truth--but no other man. 
He only blames injustice who, owing to cowardice or age or some weakness,
has not the power of being unjust.  And this is proved by the fact
that when he obtains the power, he immediately becomes unjust as far
as he can be.

The cause of all this, Socrates, was indicated by us at the beginning
of the argument, when my brother and I told you how astonished we
were to find that of all the professing panegyrists of justice--
beginning with the ancient heroes of whom any memorial has
been preserved to us, and ending with the men of our own time--
no one has ever blamed injustice or praised justice except with a
view to the glories, honours, and benefits which flow from them. 
No one has ever adequately described either in verse or prose
the true essential nature of either of them abiding in the soul,
and invisible to any human or divine eye; or shown that of
all the things of a man's soul which he has within him,
justice is the greatest good, and injustice the greatest evil. 
Had this been the universal strain, had you sought to persuade us
of this from our youth upwards, we should not have been on the watch
to keep one another from doing wrong, but every one would have been
his own watchman, because afraid, if he did wrong, of harbouring
in himself the greatest of evils.  I dare say that Thrasymachus
and others would seriously hold the language which I have been
merely repeating, and words even stronger than these about justice
and injustice, grossly, as I conceive, perverting their true nature. 
But I speak in this vehement manner, as I must frankly confess to you,
because I want to hear from you the opposite side; and I would ask you
to show not only the superiority which justice has over injustice,
but what effect they have on the possessor of them which makes
the one to be a good and the other an evil to him.  And please,
as Glaucon requested of you, to exclude reputations; for unless you
take away from each of them his true reputation and add on the false,
we shall say that you do not praise justice, but the appearance of it;
we shall think that you are only exhorting us to keep injustice dark,
and that you really agree with Thrasymachus in thinking that justice
is another's good and the interest of the stronger, and that injustice
is a man's own profit and interest, though injurious to the weaker. 
Now as you have admitted that justice is one of that highest class
of goods which are desired indeed for their results, but in a far greater
degree for their own sakes--like sight or hearing or knowledge or health,
or any other real and natural and not merely conventional good--
I would ask you in your praise of justice to regard one point only: 
I mean the essential good and evil which justice and injustice work in
the possessors of them.  Let others praise justice and censure injustice,
magnifying the rewards and honours of the one and abusing the other;
that is a manner of arguing which, coming from them, I am ready to tolerate,
but from you who have spent your whole life in the consideration
of this question, unless I hear the contrary from your own lips,
I expect something better.  And therefore, I say, not only prove
to us that justice is better than injustice, but show what they
either of them do to the possessor of them, which makes the one
to be a good and the other an evil, whether seen or unseen by gods
and men.

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS

I had always admired the genius of Glaucon and Adeimantus,
but on hearing these words I was quite delighted, and said: 
Sons of an illustrious father, that was not a bad beginning of
the Elegiac verses which the admirer of Glaucon made in honour of you
after you had distinguished yourselves at the battle of Megara:--

          `Sons of Ariston,' he sang, `divine offspring of an
          illustrious hero.'

The epithet is very appropriate, for there is something truly
divine in being able to argue as you have done for the superiority
of injustice, and remaining unconvinced by your own arguments. 
And I do believe that you are not convinced--this I infer from your
general character, for had I judged only from your speeches I should
have mistrusted you.  But now, the greater my confidence in you,
the greater is my difficulty in knowing what to say.  For I am in a strait
between two; on the one hand I feel that I am unequal to the task;
and my inability is brought home to me by the fact that you were not
satisfied with the answer which I made to Thrasymachus, proving,
as I thought, the superiority which justice has over injustice. 
And yet I cannot refuse to help, while breath and speech remain to me;
I am afraid that there would be an impiety in being present when
justice is evil spoken of and not lifting up a hand in her defence. 
And therefore I had best give such help as I can.

Glaucon and the rest entreated me by all means not to let the question drop,
but to proceed in the investigation.  They wanted to arrive
at the truth, first, about the nature of justice and injustice,
and secondly, about their relative advantages.  I told them, what I--
really thought, that the enquiry would be of a serious nature,
and would require very good eyes.  Seeing then, I said, that we
are no great wits, I think that we had better adopt a method
which I may illustrate thus; suppose that a short-sighted person
had been asked by some one to read small letters from a distance;
and it occurred to some one else that they might be found in another
place which was larger and in which the letters were larger--
if they were the same and he could read the larger letters first,
and then proceed to the lesser--this would have been thought a rare piece
of good fortune.

Very true, said Adeimantus; but how does the illustration apply
to our enquiry?

I will tell you, I replied; justice, which is the subject of
our enquiry, is, as you know, sometimes spoken of as the virtue
of an individual, and sometimes as the virtue of a State.

True, he replied.

And is not a State larger than an individual?

It is.

Then in the larger the quantity of justice is likely to be larger
and more easily discernible.  I propose therefore that we enquire
into the nature of justice and injustice, first as they appear
in the State, and secondly in the individual, proceeding from
the greater to the lesser and comparing them.

That, he said, is an excellent proposal.

And if we imagine the State in process of creation, we shall see
the justice and injustice of the State in process of creation also.

I dare say.

When the State is completed there may be a hope that the object
of our search will be more easily discovered.

Yes, far more easily.

But ought we to attempt to construct one?  I said; for to do so,
as I am inclined to think, will be a very serious task. 
Reflect therefore.

I have reflected, said Adeimantus, and am anxious that you
should proceed.

A State, I said, arises, as I conceive, out of the needs of mankind;
no one is self-sufficing, but all of us have many wants.  Can any
other origin of a State be imagined?

There can I be no other.

Then, as we have many wants, and many persons are needed to supply them,
one takes a helper for one purpose and another for another;
and when these partners and helpers are gathered together in one
habitation the body of inhabitants is termed a State.

True, he said.

And they exchange with one another, and one gives, and another receives,
under the idea that the exchange will be for their good.

Very true.

Then, I said, let us begin and create in idea a State; and yet
the true creator is necessity, who is the mother of our invention.

Of course, he replied.

Now the first and greatest of necessities is food, which is
the condition of life and existence.

Certainly.

The second is a dwelling, and the third clothing and the like.

True.

And now let us see how our city will be able to supply this great demand: 
We may suppose that one man is a husbandman, another a builder,
some one else a weaver--shall we add to them a shoemaker, or perhaps
some other purveyor to our bodily wants?

Quite right.

The barest notion of a State must include four or five men.

Clearly.

And how will they proceed?  Will each bring the result of his labours
into a common stock?--the individual husbandman, for example,
producing for four, and labouring four times as long and as much
as he need in the provision of food with which he supplies others
as well as himself; or will he have nothing to do with others
and not be at the trouble of producing for them, but provide
for himself alone a fourth of the food in a fourth of the time,
and in the remaining three-fourths of his time be employed in making
a house or a coat or a pair of shoes, having no partnership with others,
but supplying himself all his own wants?

Adeimantus thought that he should aim at producing food only
and not at producing everything.

Probably, I replied, that would be the better way; and when I hear
you say this, I am myself reminded that we are not all alike;
there are diversities of natures among us which are adapted to
different occupations.

Very true.

And will you have a work better done when the workman has
many occupations, or when he has only one?

When he has only one.

Further, there can be no doubt that a work is spoilt when not done
at the right time?

No doubt.

For business is not disposed to wait until the doer of the business
is at leisure; but the doer must follow up what he is doing,
and make the business his first object.

He must.

And if so, we must infer that all things are produced more
plentifully and easily and of a better quality when one man does
one thing which is natural to him and does it at the right time,
and leaves other things.

Undoubtedly..

Then more than four citizens will be required; for the husbandman
will not make his own plough or mattock, or other implements
of agriculture, if they are to be good for anything. 
Neither will the builder make his tools--and he too needs many;
and in like manner the weaver and shoemaker.

True.

Then carpenters, and smiths, and many other artisans, will be
sharers in our little State, which is already beginning to grow?

True.

Yet even if we add neatherds, shepherds, and other herdsmen,
in order that our husbandmen may have oxen to plough with,
and builders as well as husbandmen may have draught cattle,
and curriers and weavers fleeces and hides,--still our State will
not be very large.

That is true; yet neither will it be a very small State which
contains all these.

Then, again, there is the situation of the city--to find a place
where nothing need be imported is well-nigh impossible.

Impossible.

Then there must be another class of citizens who will bring
the required supply from another city?

There must.

But if the trader goes empty-handed, having nothing which they
require who would supply his need, he will come back empty-handed.

That is certain.

And therefore what they produce at home must be not only
enough for themselves, but such both in quantity and quality
as to accommodate those from whom their wants are supplied.

Very true.

Then more husbandmen and more artisans will be required?

They will.

Not to mention the importers and exporters, who are called merchants?

Yes.

Then we shall want merchants?

We shall.

And if merchandise is to be carried over the sea, skilful sailors
will also be needed, and in considerable numbers?

Yes, in considerable numbers.

Then, again, within the city, how will they exchange their productions? 
To secure such an exchange was, as you will remember, one of our
principal objects when we formed them into a society and constituted
a State.

Clearly they will buy and sell.

Then they will need a market-place, and a money-token for purposes
of exchange.

Certainly.

Suppose now that a husbandman, or an artisan, brings some production
to market, and he comes at a time when there is no one to exchange
with him,--is he to leave his calling and sit idle in the market-place?

Not at all; he will find people there who, seeing the want,
undertake the office of salesmen.  In well-ordered States they are
commonly those who are the weakest in bodily strength, and therefore
of little use for any other purpose; their duty is to be in the market,
and to give money in exchange for goods to those who desire to sell
and to take money from those who desire to buy.

This want, then, creates a class of retail-traders in our State. 
Is not `retailer' the term which is applied to those who sit in
the market-place engaged in buying and selling, while those who wander
from one city to another are called merchants?

Yes, he said.

And there is another class of servants, who are intellectually hardly
on the level of companionship; still they have plenty of bodily
strength for labour, which accordingly they sell, and are called,
if I do not mistake, hirelings, hire being the name which is given
to the price of their labour.

True.

Then hirelings will help to make up our population?

Yes.

And now, Adeimantus, is our State matured and perfected?

I think so.

Where, then, is justice, and where is injustice, and in what part
of the State did they spring up?

Probably in the dealings of these citizens with one another. 
cannot imagine that they are more likely to be found anywhere else.

I dare say that you are right in your suggestion, I said;
we had better think the matter out, and not shrink from the enquiry.

Let us then consider, first of all, what will be their way of life,
now that we have thus established them.  Will they not produce corn,
and wine, and clothes, and shoes, and build houses for themselves? 
And when they are housed, they will work, in summer, commonly,
stripped and barefoot, but in winter substantially clothed
and shod.  They will feed on barley-meal and flour of wheat,
baking and kneading them, making noble cakes and loaves;
these they will serve up on a mat of reeds or on clean leaves,
themselves reclining the while upon beds strewn with yew or myrtle. 
And they and their children will feast, drinking of the wine
which they have made, wearing garlands on their heads, and hymning
the praises of the gods, in happy converse with one another. 
And they will take care that their families do not exceed their means;
having an eye to poverty or war.

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

But, said Glaucon, interposing, you have not given them a relish
to their meal.

True, I replied, I had forgotten; of course they must have a relish-salt,
and olives, and cheese, and they will boil roots and herbs such
as country people prepare; for a dessert we shall give them figs,
and peas, and beans; and they will roast myrtle-berries and acorns
at the fire, drinking in moderation.  And with such a diet they
may be expected to live in peace and health to a good old age,
and bequeath a similar life to their children after them.

Yes, Socrates, he said, and if you were providing for a city of pigs,
how else would you feed the beasts?

But what would you have, Glaucon?  I replied.

Why, he said, you should give them the ordinary conveniences of life. 
People who are to be comfortable are accustomed to lie on sofas,
and dine off tables, and they should have sauces and sweets in the
modern style.

Yes, I said, now I understand:  the question which you would have me
consider is, not only how a State, but how a luxurious State is created;
and possibly there is no harm in this, for in such a State we
shall be more likely to see how justice and injustice originate. 
In my opinion the true and healthy constitution of the State is
the one which I have described.  But if you wish also to see a State
at fever heat, I have no objection.  For I suspect that many will not
be satisfied with the simpler way of way They will be for adding sofas,
and tables, and other furniture; also dainties, and perfumes,
and incense, and courtesans, and cakes, all these not of one sort only,
but in every variety; we must go beyond the necessaries of which I
was at first speaking, such as houses, and clothes, and shoes: 
the arts of the painter and the embroiderer will have to be set
in motion, and gold and ivory and all sorts of materials must
be procured.

True, he said.

Then we must enlarge our borders; for the original healthy
State is no longer sufficient.  Now will the city have to fill
and swell with a multitude of callings which are not required
by any natural want; such as the whole tribe of hunters and actors,
of whom one large class have to do with forms and colours;
another will be the votaries of music--poets and their attendant train
of rhapsodists, players, dancers, contractors; also makers of divers
kinds of articles, including women's dresses.  And we shall want
more servants.  Will not tutors be also in request, and nurses wet
and dry, tirewomen and barbers, as well as confectioners and cooks;
and swineherds, too, who were not needed and therefore had no place
in the former edition of our State, but are needed now?  They must
not be forgotten:  and there will be animals of many other kinds,
if people eat them.

Certainly.

And living in this way we shall have much greater need of physicians
than before?

Much greater.

And the country which was enough to support the original inhabitants
will be too small now, and not enough?

Quite true.

Then a slice of our neighbours' land will be wanted by us for pasture
and tillage, and they will want a slice of ours, if, like ourselves,
they exceed the limit of necessity, and give themselves up
to the unlimited accumulation of wealth?

That, Socrates, will be inevitable.

And so we shall go to war, Glaucon.  Shall we not?

Most certainly, he replied.

Then without determining as yet whether war does good or harm,
thus much we may affirm, that now we have discovered war to be derived
from causes which are also the causes of almost all the evils in States,
private as well as public.

Undoubtedly.

And our State must once more enlarge; and this time the will be
nothing short of a whole army, which will have to go out and fight
with the invaders for all that we have, as well as for the things
and persons whom we were describing above.

Why? he said; are they not capable of defending themselves?

No, I said; not if we were right in the principle which was
acknowledged by all of us when we were framing the State: 
the principle, as you will remember, was that one man cannot
practise many arts with success.

Very true, he said.

But is not war an art?

Certainly.

And an art requiring as much attention as shoemaking?

Quite true.

And the shoemaker was not allowed by us to be husbandman, or a weaver,
a builder--in order that we might have our shoes well made;
but to him and to every other worker was assigned one work
for which he was by nature fitted, and at that he was to continue
working all his life long and at no other; he was not to let
opportunities slip, and then he would become a good workman. 
Now nothing can be more important than that the work of a soldier
should be well done.  But is war an art so easily acquired that
a man may be a warrior who is also a husbandman, or shoemaker,
or other artisan; although no one in the world would be a good dice
or draught player who merely took up the game as a recreation,
and had not from his earliest years devoted himself to this and
nothing else?

No tools will make a man a skilled workman, or master of defence,
nor be of any use to him who has not learned how to handle them,
and has never bestowed any attention upon them.  How then will he
who takes up a shield or other implement of war become a good
fighter all in a day, whether with heavy-armed or any other kind
of troops?

Yes, he said, the tools which would teach men their own use would
be beyond price.

And the higher the duties of the guardian, I said, the more time,
and skill, and art, and application will be needed by him?

No doubt, he replied.

Will he not also require natural aptitude for his calling?

Certainly.

Then it will be our duty to select, if we can, natures which are
fitted for the task of guarding the city?

It will.

And the selection will be no easy matter, I said; but we must
be brave and do our best.

We must.

Is not the noble youth very like a well-bred dog in respect
of guarding and watching?

What do you mean?

I mean that both of them ought to be quick to see, and swift
to overtake the enemy when they see him; and strong too if,
when they have caught him, they have to fight with him.

All these qualities, he replied, will certainly be required by them.

Well, and your guardian must be brave if he is to fight well?

Certainly.

And is he likely to be brave who has no spirit, whether horse
or dog or any other animal?  Have you never observed how invincible
and unconquerable is spirit and how the presence of it makes
the soul of any creature to be absolutely fearless and indomitable?

I have.

Then now we have a clear notion of the bodily qualities which are
required in the guardian.

True.

And also of the mental ones; his soul is to be full of spirit?

Yes.

But are not these spirited natures apt to be savage with one another,
and with everybody else?

A difficulty by no means easy to overcome, he replied.

Whereas, I said, they ought to be dangerous to their enemies,
and gentle to their friends; if not, they will destroy themselves
without waiting for their enemies to destroy them.

True, he said.

What is to be done then?  I said; how shall we find a gentle nature
which has also a great spirit, for the one is the contradiction
of the other?

True.

He will not be a good guardian who is wanting in either of these
two qualities; and yet the combination of them appears to be impossible;
and hence we must infer that to be a good guardian is impossible.

I am afraid that what you say is true, he replied.

Here feeling perplexed I began to think over what had preceded. 
My friend, I said, no wonder that we are in a perplexity; for we have
lost sight of the image which we had before us.

What do you mean? he said.

I mean to say that there do exist natures gifted with those
opposite qualities.

And where do you find them?

Many animals, I replied, furnish examples of them; our friend the dog
is a very good one:  you know that well-bred dogs are perfectly gentle
to their familiars and acquaintances, and the reverse to strangers.

Yes, I know.

Then there is nothing impossible or out of the order of nature
in our finding a guardian who has a similar combination of qualities?

Certainly not.

Would not he who is fitted to be a guardian, besides the spirited nature,
need to have the qualities of a philosopher?

I do not apprehend your meaning.

The trait of which I am speaking, I replied, may be also seen
in the dog, and is remarkable in the animal.

What trait?

Why, a dog, whenever he sees a stranger, is angry; when an acquaintance,
he welcomes him, although the one has never done him any harm,
nor the other any good.  Did this never strike you as curious?

The matter never struck me before; but I quite recognise the truth
of your remark.

And surely this instinct of the dog is very charming;--your dog
is a true philosopher.

Why?

Why, because he distinguishes the face of a friend and of
an enemy only by the criterion of knowing and not knowing. 
And must not an animal be a lover of learning who determines
what he likes and dislikes by the test of knowledge and ignorance?

Most assuredly.

And is not the love of learning the love of wisdom, which is philosophy?

They are the same, he replied.

And may we not say confidently of man also, that he who is likely
to be gentle to his friends and acquaintances, must by nature
be a lover of wisdom and knowledge?

That we may safely affirm.

Then he who is to be a really good and noble guardian of the State
will require to unite in himself philosophy and spirit and swiftness
and strength?

Undoubtedly.

Then we have found the desired natures; and now that we
have found them, how are they to be reared and educated? 
Is not this enquiry which may be expected to throw light
on the greater enquiry which is our final end--How do justice
and injustice grow up in States? for we do not want either to omit
what is to the point or to draw out the argument to an inconvenient length.

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS

Adeimantus thought that the enquiry would be of great service to us.

Then, I said, my dear friend, the task must not be given up,
even if somewhat long.

Certainly not.

Come then, and let us pass a leisure hour in story-telling,
and our story shall be the education of our heroes.

By all means.

And what shall be their education?  Can we find a better than
the traditional sort?--and this has two divisions, gymnastic for
the body, and music for the soul.

True.

Shall we begin education with music, and go on to gymnastic afterwards?

By all means.

And when you speak of music, do you include literature or not?

I do.

And literature may be either true or false?

Yes.

And the young should be trained in both kinds, and we begin
with the false?

I do not understand your meaning, he said.

You know, I said, that we begin by telling children stories which,
though not wholly destitute of truth, are in the main fictitious;
and these stories are told them when they are not of an age to
learn gymnastics.

Very true.

That was my meaning when I said that we must teach music before gymnastics.

Quite right, he said.

You know also that the beginning is the most important part
of any work, especially in the case of a young and tender thing;
for that is the time at which the character is being formed and
the desired impression is more readily taken.

Quite true.

And shall we just carelessly allow children to hear any casual tales
which may be devised by casual persons, and to receive into their
minds ideas for the most part the very opposite of those which we
should wish them to have when they are grown up?

We cannot.

Then the first thing will be to establish a censorship of the writers
of fiction, and let the censors receive any tale of fiction which
is good, and reject the bad; and we will desire mothers and nurses
to tell their children the authorised ones only.  Let them fashion
the mind with such tales, even more fondly than they mould the body
with their hands; but most of those which are now in use must be discarded.

Of what tales are you speaking? he said.

You may find a model of the lesser in the greater, I said;
for they are necessarily of the same type, and there is the same
spirit in both of them.

Very likely, he replied; but I do not as yet know what you would
term the greater.

Those, I said, which are narrated by Homer and Hesiod, and the rest
of the poets, who have ever been the great story-tellers of mankind.

But which stories do you mean, he said; and what fault do you find
with them?

A fault which is most serious, I said; the fault of telling
a lie, and, what is more, a bad lie.

But when is this fault committed?

Whenever an erroneous representation is made of the nature of gods
and heroes,--as when a painter paints a portrait not having
the shadow of a likeness to the original.

Yes, he said, that sort of thing is certainly very blamable;
but what are the stories which you mean?

First of all, I said, there was that greatest of all lies, in high places,
which the poet told about Uranus, and which was a bad lie too,--
I mean what Hesiod says that Uranus did, and how Cronus retaliated
on him.  The doings of Cronus, and the sufferings which in turn
his son inflicted upon him, even if they were true, ought certainly
not to be lightly told to young and thoughtless persons; if possible,
they had better be buried in silence.  But if there is an absolute
necessity for their mention, a chosen few might hear them in a mystery,
and they should sacrifice not a common [Eleusinian] pig, but some
huge and unprocurable victim; and then the number of the hearers
will be very few indeed.

Why, yes, said he, those stories are extremely objectionable.

Yes, Adeimantus, they are stories not to be repeated in our State;
the young man should not be told that in committing the worst
of crimes he is far from doing anything outrageous; and that even
if he chastises his father when does wrong, in whatever manner,
he will only be following the example of the first and greatest among
the gods.

I entirely agree with you, he said; in my opinion those stories
are quite unfit to be repeated.

Neither, if we mean our future guardians to regard the habit
of quarrelling among themselves as of all things the basest,
should any word be said to them of the wars in heaven,
and of the plots and fightings of the gods against one another,
for they are not true.  No, we shall never mention the battles
of the giants, or let them be embroidered on garments; and we shall
be silent about the innumerable other quarrels of gods and heroes
with their friends and relatives.  If they would only believe us
we would tell them that quarrelling is unholy, and that never
up to this time has there been any, quarrel between citizens;
this is what old men and old women should begin by telling children;
and when they grow up, the poets also should be told to compose
for them in a similar spirit.  But the narrative of Hephaestus binding
Here his mother, or how on another occasion Zeus sent him flying
for taking her part when she was being beaten, and all the battles
of the gods in Homer--these tales must not be admitted into our State,
whether they are supposed to have an allegorical meaning or not. 
For a young person cannot judge what is allegorical and what is literal;
anything that he receives into his mind at that age is likely to
become indelible and unalterable; and therefore it is most important
that the tales which the young first hear should be models of
virtuous thoughts.

There you are right, he replied; but if any one asks where are
such models to be found and of what tales are you speaking--
how shall we answer him?

I said to him, You and I, Adeimantus, at this moment are not poets,
but founders of a State:  now the founders of a State ought
to know the general forms in which poets should cast their tales,
and the limits which must be observed by them, but to make the tales
is not their business.

Very true, he said; but what are these forms of theology which you mean?

Something of this kind, I replied:--God is always to be represented
as he truly is, whatever be the sort of poetry, epic, lyric or tragic,
in which the representation is given.

Right.

And is he not truly good? and must he not be represented as such?

Certainly.

And no good thing is hurtful?

No, indeed.

And that which is not hurtful hurts not?

Certainly not.

And that which hurts not does no evil?

No.

And can that which does no evil be a cause of evil?

Impossible.

And the good is advantageous?

Yes.

And therefore the cause of well-being?

Yes.

It follows therefore that the good is not the cause of all things,
but of the good only?

Assuredly.

Then God, if he be good, is not the author of all things,
as the many assert, but he is the cause of a few things only,
and not of most things that occur to men.  For few are the goods
of human life, and many are the evils, and the good is to be attributed
to God alone; of the evils the causes are to be sought elsewhere,
and not in him.

That appears to me to be most true, he said.

Then we must not listen to Homer or to any other poet who is guilty
of the folly of saying that two casks

          Lie at the threshold of Zeus, full of lots, one of good,
          the other of evil lots,

and that he to whom Zeus gives a mixture of the two

          Sometimes meets with evil fortune, at other times with good;

but that he to whom is given the cup of unmingled ill,

          Him wild hunger drives o'er the beauteous earth.

And again

          Zeus, who is the dispenser of good and evil to us.

And if any one asserts that the violation of oaths and treaties,
which was really the work of Pandarus, was brought about by Athene
and Zeus, or that the strife and contention of the gods was
instigated by Themis and Zeus, he shall not have our approval;
neither will we allow our young men to hear the words of Aeschylus,
that

          God plants guilt among men when he desires utterly to
          destroy a house.

And if a poet writes of the sufferings of Niobe--the subject
of the tragedy in which these iambic verses occur--or of the house
of Pelops, or of the Trojan war or on any similar theme, either we
must not permit him to say that these are the works of God,
or if they are of God, he must devise some explanation of them such
as we are seeking; he must say that God did what was just and right,
and they were the better for being punished; but that those who are
punished are miserable, and that God is the author of their misery--
the poet is not to be permitted to say; though he may say that
the wicked are miserable because they require to be punished,
and are benefited by receiving punishment from God; but that God being
good is the author of evil to any one is to be strenuously denied,
and not to be said or sung or heard in verse or prose by any
one whether old or young in any well-ordered commonwealth. 
Such a fiction is suicidal, ruinous, impious.

I agree with you, he replied, and am ready to give my assent
to the law.

Let this then be one of our rules and principles concerning the gods,
to which our poets and reciters will be expected to conform--
that God is not the author of all things, but of good only.

That will do, he said.

And what do you think of a second principle?  Shall I ask you whether God
is a magician, and of a nature to appear insidiously now in one shape,
and now in another--sometimes himself changing and passing into many forms,
sometimes deceiving us with the semblance of such transformations;
or is he one and the same immutably fixed in his own proper image?

I cannot answer you, he said, without more thought.

Well, I said; but if we suppose a change in anything, that change
must be effected either by the thing itself, or by some other thing?

Most certainly.

And things which are at their best are also least liable to be
altered or discomposed; for example, when healthiest and strongest,
the human frame is least liable to be affected by meats and drinks,
and the plant which is in the fullest vigour also suffers least from
winds or the heat of the sun or any similar causes.

Of course.

And will not the bravest and wisest soul be least confused
or deranged by any external influence?

True.

And the same principle, as I should suppose, applies to all
composite things--furniture, houses, garments; when good and well made,
they are least altered by time and circumstances.

Very true.

Then everything which is good, whether made by art or nature, or both,
is least liable to suffer change from without?

True.

But surely God and the things of God are in every way perfect?

Of course they are.

Then he can hardly be compelled by external influence to take
many shapes?

He cannot.

But may he not change and transform himself?

Clearly, he said, that must be the case if he is changed at all.

And will he then change himself for the better and fairer,
or for the worse and more unsightly?

If he change at all he can only change for the worse, for we cannot
suppose him to be deficient either in virtue or beauty.

Very true, Adeimantus; but then, would any one, whether God or man,
desire to make himself worse?

Impossible.

Then it is impossible that God should ever be willing to change;
being, as is supposed, the fairest and best that is conceivable,
every god remains absolutely and for ever in his own form.

That necessarily follows, he said, in my judgment.

Then, I said, my dear friend, let none of the poets tell us that

          The gods, taking the disguise of strangers from other lands,
          walk up and down cities in all sorts of forms;

and let no one slander Proteus and Thetis, neither let any one,
either in tragedy or in any other kind of poetry, introduce Here
disguised in the likeness of a priestess asking an alms

          For the life-giving daughters of Inachus the river of Argos;

--let us have no more lies of that sort.  Neither must we have mothers
under the influence of the poets scaring their children with a bad
version of these myths--telling how certain gods, as they say, `Go about
by night in the likeness of so many strangers and in divers forms';
but let them take heed lest they make cowards of their children,
and at the same time speak blasphemy against the gods.

Heaven forbid, he said.

But although the gods are themselves unchangeable, still by witchcraft
and deception they may make us think that they appear in various forms?

Perhaps, he replied.

Well, but can you imagine that God will be willing to lie,
whether in word or deed, or to put forth a phantom of himself?

I cannot say, he replied.

Do you not know, I said, that the true lie, if such an expression
may be allowed, is hated of gods and men?

What do you mean? he said.

I mean that no one is willingly deceived in that which is the truest
and highest part of himself, or about the truest and highest matters;
there, above all, he is most afraid of a lie having possession of him.

Still, he said, I do not comprehend you.

The reason is, I replied, that you attribute some profound meaning
to my words; but I am only saying that deception, or being deceived
or uninformed about the highest realities in the highest part
of themselves, which is the soul, and in that part of them to have
and to hold the lie, is what mankind least like;--that, I say,
is what they utterly detest.

There is nothing more hateful to them.

And, as I was just now remarking, this ignorance in the soul of him
who is deceived may be called the true lie; for the lie in words
is only a kind of imitation and shadowy image of a previous affection
of the soul, not pure unadulterated falsehood.  Am I not right?

Perfectly right.

The true lie is hated not only by the gods, but also by men?

Yes.

Whereas the lie in words is in certain cases useful and not hateful;
in dealing with enemies--that would be an instance; or again,
when those whom we call our friends in a fit of madness or illusion
are going to do some harm, then it is useful and is a sort of medicine
or preventive; also in the tales of mythology, of which we were just
now speaking--because we do not know the truth about ancient times,
we make falsehood as much like truth as we can, and so turn it
to account.

Very true, he said.

But can any of these reasons apply to God?  Can we suppose that he
is ignorant of antiquity, and therefore has recourse to invention?

That would be ridiculous, he said.

Then the lying poet has no place in our idea of God?

I should say not.

Or perhaps he may tell a lie because he is afraid of enemies?

That is inconceivable.

But he may have friends who are senseless or mad?

But no mad or senseless person can be a friend of God.

Then no motive can be imagined why God should lie?

None whatever.

Then the superhuman and divine is absolutely incapable of falsehood?

Yes.

Then is God perfectly simple and true both in word and deed;
he changes not; he deceives not, either by sign or word, by dream
or waking vision.

Your thoughts, he said, are the reflection of my own.

You agree with me then, I said, that this is the second type
or form in which we should write and speak about divine things. 
The gods are not magicians who transform themselves, neither do they
deceive mankind in any way.

I grant that.

Then, although we are admirers of Homer, we do not admire the lying
dream which Zeus sends to Agamemnon; neither will we praise the verses
of Aeschylus in which Thetis says that Apollo at her nuptials

          Was celebrating in song her fair progeny whose days were
          to he long, and to know no sickness. And when he had
          spoken of my lot as in all things blessed of heaven he
          raised a note of triumph and cheered my soul. And I
          thought that the word of Phoebus being divine and full
          of prophecy, would not fail. And now he himself who
          uttered the strain, he who was present at the banquet,
          and who said this--he it is who has slain my son.

These are the kind of sentiments about the gods which will arouse
our anger; and he who utters them shall be refused a chorus;
neither shall we allow teachers to make use of them in the instruction
of the young, meaning, as we do, that our guardians, as far as men
can be, should be true worshippers of the gods and like them.

I entirely agree, be said, in these principles, and promise to make
them my laws.

BOOK III

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS

SUCH then, I said, are our principles of theology--some tales are
to be told, and others are not to be told to our disciples from their
youth upwards, if we mean them to honour the gods and their parents,
and to value friendship with one another.

Yes; and I think that our principles are right, he said.

But if they are to be courageous, must they not learn other lessons
besides these, and lessons of such a kind as will take away the fear
of death?  Can any man be courageous who has the fear of death
in him?

Certainly not, he said.

And can he be fearless of death, or will he choose death in battle
rather than defeat and slavery, who believes the world below
to be real and terrible?

Impossible.

Then we must assume a control over the narrators of this class
of tales as well as over the others, and beg them not simply
to but rather to commend the world below, intimating to them that
their descriptions are untrue, and will do harm to our future warriors.

That will be our duty, he said.

Then, I said, we shall have to obliterate many obnoxious passages,
beginning with the verses,

          I would rather he a serf on the land of a poor and portionless man
          than rule over all the dead who have come to nought.

We must also expunge the verse, which tells us how Pluto feared,

          Lest the mansions grim and squalid which the gods abhor should he
          seen both of mortals and immortals.

And again:

          O heavens! verily in the house of Hades there is soul and ghostly
          form but no mind at all!

Again of Tiresias:--

          [To him even after death did Persephone grant mind,] that he alone
          should be wise; but the other souls are flitting shades.

Again:--

          The soul flying from the limbs had gone to Hades, lamentng her fate,
          leaving manhood and youth.

Again:--

          And the soul, with shrilling cry, passed like smoke beneath the
          earth.

And,--

          As bats in hollow of mystic cavern, whenever any of the has
          dropped out of the string and falls from the rock, fly shrilling and
          cling to one another, so did they with shrilling cry hold together
          as they moved.

And we must beg Homer and the other poets not to be angry if we strike
out these and similar passages, not because they are unpoetical,
or unattractive to the popular ear, but because the greater the poetical
charm of them, the less are they meet for the ears of boys and men
who are meant to be free, and who should fear slavery more than death.

Undoubtedly.

Also we shall have to reject all the terrible and appalling names
describe the world below--Cocytus and Styx, ghosts under the earth,
and sapless shades, and any similar words of which the very mention
causes a shudder to pass through the inmost soul of him who hears them. 
I do not say that these horrible stories may not have a use of some kind;
but there is a danger that the nerves of our guardians may be rendered
too excitable and effeminate by them.

There is a real danger, he said.

Then we must have no more of them.

True.

Another and a nobler strain must be composed and sung by us.

Clearly.

And shall we proceed to get rid of the weepings and wailings
of famous men?

They will go with the rest.

But shall we be right in getting rid of them?  Reflect:  our principle
is that the good man will not consider death terrible to any
other good man who is his comrade.

Yes; that is our principle.

And therefore he will not sorrow for his departed friend as though
he had suffered anything terrible?

He will not.

Such an one, as we further maintain, is sufficient for himself
and his own happiness, and therefore is least in need of other men.

True, he said.

And for this reason the loss of a son or brother, or the deprivation
of fortune, is to him of all men least terrible.

Assuredly.

And therefore he will be least likely to lament, and will bear with
the greatest equanimity any misfortune of this sort which may befall him.

Yes, he will feel such a misfortune far less than another.

Then we shall be right in getting rid of the lamentations of famous men,
and making them over to women (and not even to women who are good
for anything), or to men of a baser sort, that those who are being
educated by us to be the defenders of their country may scorn
to do the like.

That will be very right.

Then we will once more entreat Homer and the other poets not to
depict Achilles, who is the son of a goddess, first lying on his side,
then on his back, and then on his face; then starting up and sailing
in a frenzy along the shores of the barren sea; now taking the sooty
ashes in both his hands and pouring them over his head, or weeping
and wailing in the various modes which Homer has delineated. 
Nor should he describe Priam the kinsman of the gods as praying
and beseeching,

          Rolling in the dirt, calling each man loudly by his name.

Still more earnestly will we beg of him at all events not to introduce
the gods lamenting and saying,

          Alas! my misery! Alas! that I bore the harvest to my sorrow.

But if he must introduce the gods, at any rate let him not dare
so completely to misrepresent the greatest of the gods, as to make
him say--

          O heavens! with my eyes verily I behold a dear friend of mine chased
          round and round the city, and my heart is sorrowful.

Or again:--

          Woe is me that I am fated to have Sarpedon, dearest of men to me,
          subdued at the hands of Patroclus the son of Menoetius.

For if, my sweet Adeimantus, our youth seriously listen to such unworthy
representations of the gods, instead of laughing at them as they ought,
hardly will any of them deem that he himself, being but a man,
can be dishonoured by similar actions; neither will he rebuke any
inclination which may arise in his mind to say and do the like. 
And instead of having any shame or self-control, he will be always
whining and lamenting on slight occasions.

Yes, he said, that is most true.

Yes, I replied; but that surely is what ought not to be,
as the argument has just proved to us; and by that proof
we must abide until it is disproved by a better.

It ought not to be.

Neither ought our guardians to be given to laughter.  For a fit
of laughter which has been indulged to excess almost always produces
a violent reaction.

So I believe.

Then persons of worth, even if only mortal men, must not be represented
as overcome by laughter, and still less must such a representation
of the gods be allowed.

Still less of the gods, as you say, he replied.

Then we shall not suffer such an expression to be used about the gods
as that of Homer when he describes how

          Inextinguishable laughter arose among the blessed gods, when they
          saw Hephaestus bustling about the mansion.

On your views, we must not admit them.

On my views, if you like to father them on me; that we must
not admit them is certain.

Again, truth should be highly valued; if, as we were saying,
a lie is useless to the gods, and useful only as a medicine to men,
then the use of such medicines should be restricted to physicians;
private individuals have no business with them.

Clearly not, he said.

Then if any one at all is to have the privilege of lying,
the rulers of the State should be the persons; and they,
in their dealings either with enemies or with their own citizens,
may be allowed to lie for the public good.  But nobody else
should meddle with anything of the kind; and although the rulers
have this privilege, for a private man to lie to them in return is
to be deemed a more heinous fault than for the patient or the pupil
of a gymnasium not to speak the truth about his own bodily illnesses
to the physician or to the trainer, or for a sailor not to tell
the captain what is happening about the ship and the rest of the crew,
and how things are going with himself or his fellow sailors.

Most true, he said.

If, then, the ruler catches anybody beside himself lying in the State,

          Any of the craftsmen, whether he priest or physician or carpenter.

he will punish him for introducing a practice which is equally
subversive and destructive of ship or State.

Most certainly, he said, if our idea of the State is ever carried out.

In the next place our youth must be temperate?

Certainly.

Are not the chief elements of temperance, speaking generally,
obedience to commanders and self-control in sensual pleasures?

True.

Then we shall approve such language as that of Diomede in Homer,

          Friend, sit still and obey my word,

and the verses which follow,

          The Greeks marched breathing prowess,
          ...in silent awe of their leaders,

and other sentiments of the same kind.

We shall.

What of this line,

          O heavy with wine, who hast the eyes of a dog and the heart of a
          stag,

and of the words which follow?  Would you say that these, or any
similar impertinences which private individuals are supposed to address
to their rulers, whether in verse or prose, are well or ill spoken?

They are ill spoken.

They may very possibly afford some amusement, but they do not
conduce to temperance.  And therefore they are likely to do harm
to our young men--you would agree with me there?

Yes.

And then, again, to make the wisest of men say that nothing in his
opinion is more glorious than

          When the tables are full of bread and meat, and the cup-bearer
          carries round wine which he draws from the bowl and pours into the
          cups,

is it fit or conducive to temperance for a young man to hear such words? 
Or the verse

          The saddest of fates is to die and meet destiny from hunger?

What would you say again to the tale of Zeus, who, while other
gods and men were asleep and he the only person awake,
lay devising plans, but forgot them all in a moment through his lust,
and was so completely overcome at the sight of Here that he would
not even go into the hut, but wanted to lie with her on the ground,
declaring that he had never been in such a state of rapture before,
even when they first met one another

          Without the knowledge of their parents;

or that other tale of how Hephaestus, because of similar goings on,
cast a chain around Ares and Aphrodite?

Indeed, he said, I am strongly of opinion that they ought not
to hear that sort of thing.

But any deeds of endurance which are done or told by famous men,
these they ought to see and hear; as, for example, what is said
in the verses,

          He smote his breast, and thus reproached his heart,
          Endure, my heart; far worse hast thou endured!

Certainly, he said.

In the next place, we must not let them be receivers of gifts
or lovers of money.

Certainly not.

Neither must we sing to them of

          Gifts persuading gods, and persuading reverend kings.

Neither is Phoenix, the tutor of Achilles, to be approved
or deemed to have given his pupil good counsel when he told him
that he should take the gifts of the Greeks and assist them;
but that without a gift he should not lay aside his anger. 
Neither will we believe or acknowledge Achilles himself to have
been such a lover of money that he took Agamemnon's or that when
he had received payment he restored the dead body of Hector,
but that without payment he was unwilling to do so.

Undoubtedly, he said, these are not sentiments which can be approved.

Loving Homer as I do, I hardly like to say that in attributing
these feelings to Achilles, or in believing that they are truly
to him, he is guilty of downright impiety.  As little can I believe
the narrative of his insolence to Apollo, where he says,

          Thou hast wronged me, O far-darter, most abominable of deities.
          Verily I would he even with thee, if I had only the power,

or his insubordination to the river-god, on whose divinity he is ready
to lay hands; or his offering to the dead Patroclus of his own hair,
which had been previously dedicated to the other river-god Spercheius,
and that he actually performed this vow; or that he dragged Hector
round the tomb of Patroclus, and slaughtered the captives at the pyre;
of all this I cannot believe that he was guilty, any more than I can
allow our citizens to believe that he, the wise Cheiron's pupil,
the son of a goddess and of Peleus who was the gentlest of men
and third in descent from Zeus, was so disordered in his wits as to
be at one time the slave of two seemingly inconsistent passions,
meanness, not untainted by avarice, combined with overweening
contempt of gods and men.

You are quite right, he replied.

And let us equally refuse to believe, or allow to be repeated,
the tale of Theseus son of Poseidon, or of Peirithous son
of Zeus, going forth as they did to perpetrate a horrid rape;
or of any other hero or son of a god daring to do such impious
and dreadful things as they falsely ascribe to them in our day: 
and let us further compel the poets to declare either that these acts
were not done by them, or that they were not the sons of gods;--
both in the same breath they shall not be permitted to affirm. 
We will not have them trying to persuade our youth that the gods
are the authors of evil, and that heroes are no better than
men-sentiments which, as we were saying, are neither pious
nor true, for we have already proved that evil cannot come from
the gods.

Assuredly not.

And further they are likely to have a bad effect on those who hear them;
for everybody will begin to excuse his own vices when he is convinced
that similar wickednesses are always being perpetrated by--

          The kindred of the gods, the relatives of Zeus, whose ancestral
          altar, the attar of Zeus, is aloft in air on the peak of Ida,

and who have

          the blood of deities yet flowing in their veins.

And therefore let us put an end to such tales, lest they engender
laxity of morals among the young.

By all means, he replied.

But now that we are determining what classes of subjects are or are
not to be spoken of, let us see whether any have been omitted by us. 
The manner in which gods and demigods and heroes and the world below
should be treated has been already laid down.

Very true.

And what shall we say about men?  That is clearly the remaining
portion of our subject.

Clearly so.

But we are not in a condition to answer this question at present,
my friend.

Why not?

Because, if I am not mistaken, we shall have to say that about men
poets and story-tellers are guilty of making the gravest misstatements
when they tell us that wicked men are often happy, and the good miserable;
and that injustice is profitable when undetected, but that justice
is a man's own loss and another's gain--these things we shall
forbid them to utter, and command them to sing and say the opposite.

To be sure we shall, he replied.

But if you admit that I am right in this, then I shall maintain that you
have implied the principle for which we have been all along contending.

I grant the truth of your inference.

That such things are or are not to be said about men is a question
which we cannot determine until we have discovered what justice is,
and how naturally advantageous to the possessor, whether he seems
to be just or not.

Most true, he said.

Enough of the subjects of poetry:  let us now speak of the style;
and when this has been considered, both matter and manner will have
been completely treated.

I do not understand what you mean, said Adeimantus.

Then I must make you understand; and perhaps I may be more
intelligible if I put the matter in this way.  You are aware,
I suppose, that all mythology and poetry is a narration of events,
either past, present, or to come?

Certainly, he replied.

And narration may be either simple narration, or imitation,
or a union of the two?

That again, he said, I do not quite understand.

I fear that I must be a ridiculous teacher when I have so much difficulty
in making myself apprehended.  Like a bad speaker, therefore, I will
not take the whole of the subject, but will break a piece off in
illustration of my meaning.  You know the first lines of the Iliad,
in which the poet says that Chryses prayed Agamemnon to release
his daughter, and that Agamemnon flew into a passion with him;
whereupon Chryses, failing of his object, invoked the anger
of the God against the Achaeans.  Now as far as these lines,

          And he prayed all the Greeks, but especially the two sons of Atreus,
          the chiefs of the people,

the poet is speaking in his own person; he never leads us to suppose
that he is any one else.  But in what follows he takes the person
of Chryses, and then he does all that he can to make us believe
that the speaker is not Homer, but the aged priest himself. 
And in this double form he has cast the entire narrative of the events
which occurred at Troy and in Ithaca and throughout the Odyssey.

Yes.

And a narrative it remains both in the speeches which the poet
recites from time to time and in the intermediate passages?

Quite true.

But when the poet speaks in the person of another, may we not
say that he assimilates his style to that of the person who,
as he informs you, is going to speak?

Certainly.

And this assimilation of himself to another, either by the use
of voice or gesture, is the imitation of the person whose character
he assumes?

Of course.

Then in this case the narrative of the poet may be said to proceed
by way of imitation?

Very true.

Or, if the poet everywhere appears and never conceals himself,
then again the imitation is dropped, and his poetry becomes
simple narration.  However, in order that I may make my meaning
quite clear, and that you may no more say, I don't understand,'
I will show how the change might be effected.  If Homer had said,
`The priest came, having his daughter's ransom in his hands,
supplicating the Achaeans, and above all the kings;' and then if,
instead of speaking in the person of Chryses, he had continued
in his own person, the words would have been, not imitation,
but simple narration.  The passage would have run as follows
(I am no poet, and therefore I drop the metre), `The priest came
and prayed the gods on behalf of the Greeks that they might capture
Troy and return safely home, but begged that they would give him back
his daughter, and take the ransom which he brought, and respect the God. 
Thus he spoke, and the other Greeks revered the priest and assented. 
But Agamemnon was wroth, and bade him depart and not come again,
lest the staff and chaplets of the God should be of no avail to him--
the daughter of Chryses should not be released, he said--
she should grow old with him in Argos.  And then he told him to go
away and not to provoke him, if he intended to get home unscathed. 
And the old man went away in fear and silence, and, when he
had left the camp, he called upon Apollo by his many names,
reminding him of everything which he had done pleasing to him,
whether in building his temples, or in offering sacrifice, and praying
that his good deeds might be returned to him, and that the Achaeans
might expiate his tears by the arrows of the god,'--and so on. 
In this way the whole becomes simple narrative.

I understand, he said.

Or you may suppose the opposite case--that the intermediate passages
are omitted, and the dialogue only left.

That also, he said, I understand; you mean, for example, as in tragedy.

You have conceived my meaning perfectly; and if I mistake not,
what you failed to apprehend before is now made clear to you,
that poetry and mythology are, in some cases, wholly imitative--
instances of this are supplied by tragedy and comedy; there is
likewise the opposite style, in which the my poet is the only speaker--
of this the dithyramb affords the best example; and the combination
of both is found in epic, and in several other styles of poetry.  Do I
take you with me?

Yes, he said; I see now what you meant.

I will ask you to remember also what I began by saying, that we
had done with the subject and might proceed to the style.

Yes, I remember.

In saying this, I intended to imply that we must come to an
understanding about the mimetic art,--whether the poets, in narrating
their stories, are to be allowed by us to imitate, and if so,
whether in whole or in part, and if the latter, in what parts;
or should all imitation be prohibited?

You mean, I suspect, to ask whether tragedy and comedy shall
be admitted into our State?

Yes, I said; but there may be more than this in question: 
I really do not know as yet, but whither the argument may blow,
thither we go.

And go we will, he said.

Then, Adeimantus, let me ask you whether our guardians ought to be imitators;
or rather, has not this question been decided by the rule already
laid down that one man can only do one thing well, and not many;
and that if he attempt many, he will altogether fall of gaining
much reputation in any?

Certainly.

And this is equally true of imitation; no one man can imitate
many things as well as he would imitate a single one?

He cannot.

Then the same person will hardly be able to play a serious part in life,
and at the same time to be an imitator and imitate many other parts
as well; for even when two species of imitation are nearly allied,
the same persons cannot succeed in both, as, for example, the writers
of tragedy and comedy--did you not just now call them imitations?

Yes, I did; and you are right in thinking that the same persons
cannot succeed in both.

Any more than they can be rhapsodists and actors at once?

True.

Neither are comic and tragic actors the same; yet all these things
are but imitations.

They are so.

And human nature, Adeimantus, appears to have been coined into yet
smaller pieces, and to be as incapable of imitating many things well,
as of performing well the actions of which the imitations are copies.

Quite true, he replied.

If then we adhere to our original notion and bear in mind that
our guardians, setting aside every other business, are to dedicate
themselves wholly to the maintenance of freedom in the State,
making this their craft, and engaging in no work which does not bear
on this end, they ought not to practise or imitate anything else;
if they imitate at all, they should imitate from youth upward
only those characters which are suitable to their profession--
the courageous, temperate, holy, free, and the like; but they should not
depict or be skilful at imitating any kind of illiberality or baseness,
lest from imitation they should come to be what they imitate. 
Did you never observe how imitations, beginning in early youth
and continuing far into life, at length grow into habits and become a
second nature, affecting body, voice, and mind?

Yes, certainly, he said.

Then, I said, we will not allow those for whom we profess a care
and of whom we say that they ought to be good men, to imitate
a woman, whether young or old, quarrelling with her husband,
or striving and vaunting against the gods in conceit of her happiness,
or when she is in affliction, or sorrow, or weeping; and certainly
not one who is in sickness, love, or labour.

Very right, he said.

Neither must they represent slaves, male or female,
performing the offices of slaves?

They must not.

And surely not bad men, whether cowards or any others, who do
the reverse of what we have just been prescribing, who scold or mock
or revile one another in drink or out of in drink or, or who in any
other manner sin against themselves and their neighbours in word
or deed, as the manner of such is.  Neither should they be trained
to imitate the action or speech of men or women who are mad or bad;
for madness, like vice, is to be known but not to be practised
or imitated.

Very true, he replied.

Neither may they imitate smiths or other artificers, or oarsmen,
or boatswains, or the like?

How can they, he said, when they are not allowed to apply their
minds to the callings of any of these?

Nor may they imitate the neighing of horses, the bellowing of bulls,
the murmur of rivers and roll of the ocean, thunder, and all that sort
of thing?

Nay, he said, if madness be forbidden, neither may they copy
the behaviour of madmen.

You mean, I said, if I understand you aright, that there is one
sort of narrative style which may be employed by a truly good man
when he has anything to say, and that another sort will be used
by a man of an opposite character and education.

And which are these two sorts? he asked.

Suppose, I answered, that a just and good man in the course of a
narration comes on some saying or action of another good man,--
I should imagine that he will like to personate him, and will not be
ashamed of this sort of imitation:  he will be most ready to play
the part of the good man when he is acting firmly and wisely;
in a less degree when he is overtaken by illness or love or drink,
or has met with any other disaster.  But when he comes to a character
which is unworthy of him, he will not make a study of that;
he will disdain such a person, and will assume his likeness,
if at all, for a moment only when he is performing some good action;
at other times he will be ashamed to play a part which he has
never practised, nor will he like to fashion and frame himself
after the baser models; he feels the employment of such an art,
unless in jest, to be beneath him, and his mind revolts
at it.

So I should expect, he replied.

Then he will adopt a mode of narration such as we have illustrated
out of Homer, that is to say, his style will be both imitative
and narrative; but there will be very little of the former,
and a great deal of the latter.  Do you agree?

Certainly, he said; that is the model which such a speaker must
necessarily take.

But there is another sort of character who will narrate anything,
and, the worse lie is, the more unscrupulous he will be; nothing will
be too bad for him:  and he will be ready to imitate anything,
not as a joke, but in right good earnest, and before a large company. 
As I was just now saying, he will attempt to represent the roll
of thunder, the noise of wind and hall, or the creaking of wheels,
and pulleys, and the various sounds of flutes; pipes, trumpets, and all
sorts of instruments:  he will bark like a dog, bleat like a sheep,
or crow like a cock; his entire art will consist in imitation of voice
and gesture, and there will be very little narration.

That, he said, will be his mode of speaking.

These, then, are the two kinds of style?

Yes.

And you would agree with me in saying that one of them is simple
and has but slight changes; and if the harmony and rhythm are
also chosen for their simplicity, the result is that the speaker,
if hc speaks correctly, is always pretty much the same in style,
and he will keep within the limits of a single harmony (for the changes
are not great), and in like manner he will make use of nearly
the same rhythm?

That is quite true, he said.

Whereas the other requires all sorts of harmonies and all sorts
of rhythms, if the music and the style are to correspond,
because the style has all sorts of changes.

That is also perfectly true, he replied.

And do not the two styles, or the mixture of the two,
comprehend all poetry, and every form of expression in words? 
No one can say anything except in one or other of them or in both together.

They include all, he said.

And shall we receive into our State all the three styles, or one
only of the two unmixed styles? or would you include the mixed?

I should prefer only to admit the pure imitator of virtue.

Yes, I said, Adeimantus, but the mixed style is also very charming: 
and indeed the pantomimic, which is the opposite of the one chosen
by you, is the most popular style with children and their attendants,
and with the world in general.

I do not deny it.

But I suppose you would argue that such a style is unsuitable
to our State, in which human nature is not twofold or manifold,
for one man plays one part only?

Yes; quite unsuitable.

And this is the reason why in our State, and in our State only,
we shall find a shoemaker to be a shoemaker and not a pilot also,
and a husbandman to be a husbandman and not a dicast also, and a soldier
a soldier and not a trader also, and the same throughout?

True, he said.

And therefore when any one of these pantomimic gentlemen,
who are so clever that they can imitate anything, comes to us,
and makes a proposal to exhibit himself and his poetry, we will
fall down and worship him as a sweet and holy and wonderful being;
but we must also inform him that in our State such as he
are not permitted to exist; the law will not allow them. 
And so when we have anointed him with myrrh, and set a garland
of wool upon his head, we shall send him away to another city. 
For we mean to employ for our souls' health the rougher and severer
poet or story-teller, who will imitate the style of the virtuous only,
and will follow those models which we prescribed at first when we
began the education of our soldiers.

We certainly will, he said, if we have the power.

Then now, my friend, I said, that part of music or literary education
which relates to the story or myth may be considered to be finished;
for the matter and manner have both been discussed.

I think so too, he said.

Next in order will follow melody and song.

That is obvious.

Every one can see already what we ought to say about them, if we
are to be consistent with ourselves.

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

I fear, said Glaucon, laughing, that the words `every one'
hardly includes me, for I cannot at the moment say what they should be;
though I may guess.

At any rate you can tell that a song or ode has three parts--
the words, the melody, and the rhythm; that degree of knowledge I
may presuppose?

Yes, he said; so much as that you may.

And as for the words, there surely be no difference words between
words which are and which are not set to music; both will conform
to the same laws, and these have been already determined by us?

Yes.

And the melody and rhythm will depend upon the words?

Certainly.

We were saying, when we spoke of the subject-matter, that we
had no need of lamentations and strains of sorrow?

True.

And which are the harmonies expressive of sorrow?  You are musical,
and can tell me.

The harmonies which you mean are the mixed or tenor Lydian,
and the full-toned or bass Lydian, and such like.

These then, I said, must be banished; even to women who have a character
to maintain they are of no use, and much less to men.  Certainly.

In the next place, drunkenness and softness and indolence are
utterly unbecoming the character of our guardians.

Utterly unbecoming.

And which are the soft or drinking harmonies?

The Ionian, he replied, and the Lydian; they are termed `relaxed.'

Well, and are these of any military use?

Quite the reverse, he replied; and if so the Dorian and the Phrygian
are the only ones which you have left.

I answered:  Of the harmonies I know nothing, but I want to have
one warlike, to sound the note or accent which a brave man utters
in the hour of danger and stern resolve, or when his cause is failing,
and he is going to wounds or death or is overtaken by some other evil,
and at every such crisis meets the blows of fortune with firm step
and a determination to endure; and another to be used by him in times
of peace and freedom of action, when there is no pressure of necessity,
and he is seeking to persuade God by prayer, or man by instruction
and admonition, or on the other hand, when he is expressing his
willingness to yield to persuasion or entreaty or admonition,
and which represents him when by prudent conduct he has attained
his end, not carried away by his success, but acting moderately
and wisely under the circumstances, and acquiescing in the event. 
These two harmonies I ask you to leave; the strain of necessity and
the strain of freedom, the strain of the unfortunate and the strain
of the fortunate, the strain of courage, and the strain of temperance;
these, I say, leave.

And these, he replied, are the Dorian and Phrygian harmonies
of which I was just now speaking.

Then, I said, if these and these only are to be used in our songs
and melodies, we shall not want multiplicity of notes or a panharmonic scale?

I suppose not.

Then we shall not maintain the artificers of lyres with three corners
and complex scales, or the makers of any other many-stringed
curiously-harmonised instruments?

Certainly not.

But what do you say to flute-makers and flute-players? Would you admit
them into our State when you reflect that in this composite use of harmony
the flute is worse than all the stringed instruments put together;
even the panharmonic music is only an imitation of the flute?

Clearly not.

There remain then only the lyre and the harp for use in the city,
and the shepherds may have a pipe in the country.

That is surely the conclusion to be drawn from the argument.

The preferring of Apollo and his instruments to Marsyas and his
instruments is not at all strange, I said.

Not at all, he replied.

And so, by the dog of Egypt, we have been unconsciously purging
the State, which not long ago we termed luxurious.

And we have done wisely, he replied.

Then let us now finish the purgation, I said.  Next in order
to harmonies, rhythms will naturally follow, and they should be
subject to the same rules, for we ought not to seek out complex
systems of metre, or metres of every kind, but rather to discover
what rhythms are the expressions of a courageous and harmonious life;
and when we have found them, we shall adapt the foot and the melody
to words having a like spirit, not the words to the foot and melody. 
To say what these rhythms are will be your duty--you must teach me them,
as you have already taught me the harmonies.

But, indeed, he replied, I cannot tell you.  I only know that there
are some three principles of rhythm out of which metrical systems
are framed, just as in sounds there are four notes out of which all
the harmonies are composed; that is an observation which I have made. 
But of what sort of lives they are severally the imitations I am
unable to say.

Then, I said, we must take Damon into our counsels; and he will tell
us what rhythms are expressive of meanness, or insolence, or fury,
or other unworthiness, and what are to be reserved for the expression
of opposite feelings.  And I think that I have an indistinct recollection
of his mentioning a complex Cretic rhythm; also a dactylic or heroic,
and he arranged them in some manner which I do not quite understand,
making the rhythms equal in the rise and fall of the foot,
long and short alternating; and, unless I am mistaken, he spoke
of an iambic as well as of a trochaic rhythm, and assigned to them
short and long quantities.  Also in some cases he appeared to praise
or censure the movement of the foot quite as much as the rhythm;
or perhaps a combination of the two; for I am not certain what he meant. 
These matters, however, as I was saying, had better be referred
to Damon himself, for the analysis of the subject would be difficult,
you know.

Rather so, I should say.

But there is no difficulty in seeing that grace or the absence
of grace is an effect of good or bad rhythm.

None at all.

And also that good and bad rhythm naturally assimilate to a good and
bad style; and that harmony and discord in like manner follow style;
for our principle is that rhythm and harmony are regulated by the words,
and not the words by them.

Just so, he said, they should follow the words.

And will not the words and the character of the style depend
on the temper of the soul?

Yes.

And everything else on the style?

Yes.

Then beauty of style and harmony and grace and good rhythm depend
on simplicity,--I mean the true simplicity of a rightly and nobly
ordered mind and character, not that other simplicity which is
only an euphemism for folly?

Very true, he replied.

And if our youth are to do their work in life, must they not make
these graces and harmonies their perpetual aim?

They must.

And surely the art of the painter and every other creative and
constructive art are full of them,--weaving, embroidery, architecture,
and every kind of manufacture; also nature, animal and vegetable,--
in all of them there is grace or the absence of grace. 
And ugliness and discord and inharmonious motion are nearly allied
to ill words and ill nature, as grace and harmony are the twin
sisters of goodness and virtue and bear their likeness.

That is quite true, he said.

But shall our superintendence go no further, and are the poets only
to be required by us to express the image of the good in their works,
on pain, if they do anything else, of expulsion from our State? 
Or is the same control to be extended to other artists, and are
they also to be prohibited from exhibiting the opposite forms
of vice and intemperance and meanness and indecency in sculpture
and building and the other creative arts; and is he who cannot
conform to this rule of ours to be prevented from practising his art
in our State, lest the taste of our citizens be corrupted by him? 
We would not have our guardians grow up amid images of moral deformity,
as in some noxious pasture, and there browse and feed upon many
a baneful herb and flower day by day, little by little, until they
silently gather a festering mass of corruption in their own soul. 
Let our artists rather be those who are gifted to discern the true
nature of the beautiful and graceful; then will our youth dwell
in a land of health, amid fair sights and sounds, and receive the good
in everything; and beauty, the effluence of fair works, shall flow
into the eye and ear, like a health-giving breeze from a purer region,
and insensibly draw the soul from earliest years into likeness and
sympathy with the beauty of reason.

There can be no nobler training than that, he replied.

And therefore, I said, Glaucon, musical training is a more potent
instrument than any other, because rhythm and harmony find their way
into the inward places of the soul, on which they mightily fasten,
imparting grace, and making the soul of him who is rightly
educated graceful, or of him who is ill-educated ungraceful;
and also because he who has received this true education of the inner
being will most shrewdly perceive omissions or faults in art
and nature, and with a true taste, while he praises and rejoices
over and receives into his soul the good, and becomes noble and good,
he will justly blame and hate the bad, now in the days of his youth,
even before he is able to know the reason why; and when reason comes
he will recognise and salute the friend with whom his education has
made him long familiar.

Yes, he said, I quite agree with you in thinking that our youth
should be trained in music and on the grounds which you mention.

Just as in learning to read, I said, we were satisfied when we knew
the letters of the alphabet, which are very few, in all their recurring
sizes and combinations; not slighting them as unimportant whether they
occupy a space large or small, but everywhere eager to make them out;
and not thinking ourselves perfect in the art of reading until we
recognise them wherever they are found:

True--

Or, as we recognise the reflection of letters in the water,
or in a mirror, only when we know the letters themselves;
the same art and study giving us the knowledge of both:

Exactly--

Even so, as I maintain, neither we nor our guardians, whom we have to educate,
can ever become musical until we and they know the essential forms,
in all their combinations, and can recognise them and their images
wherever they are found, not slighting them either in small things
or great, but believing them all to be within the sphere of one art and study.

Most assuredly.

And when a beautiful soul harmonises with a beautiful form,
and the two are cast in one mould, that will be the fairest of sights
to him who has an eye to see it?

The fairest indeed.

And the fairest is also the loveliest?

That may be assumed.

And the man who has the spirit of harmony will be most in love with
the loveliest; but he will not love him who is of an inharmonious soul?

That is true, he replied, if the deficiency be in his soul;
but if there be any merely bodily defect in another he will be patient
of it, and will love all the same.

I perceive, I said, that you have or have had experiences of
this sort, and I agree.  But let me ask you another question: 
Has excess of pleasure any affinity to temperance?

How can that be? he replied; pleasure deprives a man of the use
of his faculties quite as much as pain.

Or any affinity to virtue in general?

None whatever.

Any affinity to wantonness and intemperance?

Yes, the greatest.

And is there any greater or keener pleasure than that of sensual love?

No, nor a madder.

Whereas true love is a love of beauty and order--temperate and harmonious?

Quite true, he said.

Then no intemperance or madness should be allowed to approach
true love?

Certainly not.

Then mad or intemperate pleasure must never be allowed to come
near the lover and his beloved; neither of them can have any part
in it if their love is of the right sort?

No, indeed, Socrates, it must never come near them.

Then I suppose that in the city which we are founding you would make
a law to the effect that a friend should use no other familiarity
to his love than a father would use to his son, and then only
for a noble purpose, and he must first have the other's consent;
and this rule is to limit him in all his intercourse, and he is never
to be seen going further, or, if he exceeds, he is to be deemed
guilty of coarseness and bad taste.

I quite agree, he said.

Thus much of music, which makes a fair ending; for what should
be the end of music if not the love of beauty?

I agree, he said.

After music comes gymnastic, in which our youth are next to be trained.

Certainly.

Gymnastic as well as music should begin in early years; the training
in it should be careful and should continue through life. 
Now my belief is,--and this is a matter upon which I should like to
have your opinion in confirmation of my own, but my own belief is,--
not that the good body by any bodily excellence improves the soul,
but, on the contrary, that the good soul, by her own excellence,
improves the body as far as this may be possible.  What do you say?

Yes, I agree.

Then, to the mind when adequately trained, we shall be right in handing
over the more particular care of the body; and in order to avoid
prolixity we will now only give the general outlines of the subject.

Very good.

That they must abstain from intoxication has been already remarked by us;
for of all persons a guardian should be the last to get drunk
and not know where in the world he is.

Yes, he said; that a guardian should require another guardian
to take care of him is ridiculous indeed.

But next, what shall we say of their food; for the men
are in training for the great contest of all--are they not?

Yes, he said.

And will the habit of body of our ordinary athletes be suited
to them?

Why not?

I am afraid, I said, that a habit of body such as they have is
but a sleepy sort of thing, and rather perilous to health. 
Do you not observe that these athletes sleep away their lives,
and are liable to most dangerous illnesses if they depart, in ever
so slight a degree, from their customary regimen?

Yes, I do.

Then, I said, a finer sort of training will be required for our
warrior athletes, who are to be like wakeful dogs, and to see and hear
with the utmost keenness; amid the many changes of water and also of food,
of summer heat and winter cold, which they will have to endure
when on a campaign, they must not be liable to break down in health.

That is my view.

The really excellent gymnastic is twin sister of that simple music
which we were just now describing.

How so?

Why, I conceive that there is a gymnastic which, like our music,
is simple and good; and especially the military gymnastic.

What do you mean?

My meaning may be learned from Homer; he, you know, feeds his heroes
at their feasts, when they are campaigning, on soldiers' fare; they have
no fish, although they are on the shores of the Hellespont, and they
are not allowed boiled meats but only roast, which is the food
most convenient for soldiers, requiring only that they should light
a fire, and not involving the trouble of carrying about pots and pans.

True.

And I can hardly be mistaken in saying that sweet sauces are nowhere
mentioned in Homer.  In proscribing them, however, he is not singular;
all professional athletes are well aware that a man who is to be
in good condition should take nothing of the kind.

Yes, he said; and knowing this, they are quite right in not taking them.

Then you would not approve of Syracusan dinners, and the refinements
of Sicilian cookery?

I think not.

Nor, if a man is to be in condition, would you allow him to have
a Corinthian girl as his fair friend?

Certainly not.

Neither would you approve of the delicacies, as they are thought,
of Athenian confectionery?

Certainly not.

All such feeding and living may be rightly compared by us to melody
and song composed in the panharmonic style, and in all the rhythms.  Exactly.

There complexity engendered license, and here disease;
whereas simplicity in music was the parent of temperance in the soul;
and simplicity in gymnastic of health in the body.

Most true, he said.

But when intemperance and disease multiply in a State, halls of justice
and medicine are always being opened; and the arts of the doctor
and the lawyer give themselves airs, finding how keen is the interest
which not only the slaves but the freemen of a city take about them.

Of course.

And yet what greater proof can there be of a bad and disgraceful
state of education than this, that not only artisans and the meaner
sort of people need the skill of first-rate physicians and judges,
but also those who would profess to have had a liberal education? 
Is it not disgraceful, and a great sign of want of good-breeding,
that a man should have to go abroad for his law and physic because
he has none of his own at home, and must therefore surrender
himself into the hands of other men whom he makes lords and judges
over him?

Of all things, he said, the most disgraceful.

Would you say `most,' I replied, when you consider that there is a further
stage of the evil in which a man is not only a life-long litigant,
passing all his days in the courts, either as plaintiff or defendant,
but is actually led by his bad taste to pride himself on
his litigiousness; he imagines that he is a master in dishonesty;
able to take every crooked turn, and wriggle into and out of every hole,
bending like a withy and getting out of the way of justice: 
and all for what?--in order to gain small points not worth mentioning,
he not knowing that so to order his life as to be able to do
without a napping judge is a far higher and nobler sort of thing. 
Is not that still more disgraceful?

Yes, he said, that is still more disgraceful.

Well, I said, and to require the help of medicine, not when a wound
has to be cured, or on occasion of an epidemic, but just because,
by indolence and a habit of life such as we have been describing,
men fill themselves with waters and winds, as if their bodies
were a marsh, compelling the ingenious sons of Asclepius to find
more names for diseases, such as flatulence and catarrh;
is not this, too, a disgrace?

Yes, he said, they do certainly give very strange and newfangled
names to diseases.

Yes, I said, and I do not believe that there were any such diseases
in the days of Asclepius; and this I infer from the circumstance
that the hero Eurypylus, after he has been wounded in Homer,
drinks a posset of Pramnian wine well besprinkled with barley-meal
and grated cheese, which are certainly inflammatory, and yet the sons
of Asclepius who were at the Trojan war do not blame the damsel
who gives him the drink, or rebuke Patroclus, who is treating
his case.

Well, he said, that was surely an extraordinary drink to be given
to a person in his condition.

Not so extraordinary, I replied, if you bear in mind that in
former days, as is commonly said, before the time of Herodicus,
the guild of Asclepius did not practise our present system of medicine,
which may be said to educate diseases.  But Herodicus, being a trainer,
and himself of a sickly constitution, by a combination of training
and doctoring found out a way of torturing first and chiefly himself,
and secondly the rest of the world.

How was that? he said.

By the invention of lingering death; for he had a mortal disease
which he perpetually tended, and as recovery was out of the question,
he passed his entire life as a valetudinarian; he could do nothing
but attend upon himself, and he was in constant torment whenever
he departed in anything from his usual regimen, and so dying hard,
by the help of science he struggled on to old age.

A rare reward of his skill!

Yes, I said; a reward which a man might fairly expect who never
understood that, if Asclepius did not instruct his descendants in
valetudinarian arts, the omission arose, not from ignorance or inexperience
of such a branch of medicine, but because he knew that in all well-ordered
states every individual has an occupation to which he must attend,
and has therefore no leisure to spend in continually being ill. 
This we remark in the case of the artisan, but, ludicrously enough,
do not apply the same rule to people of the richer sort.

How do you mean? he said.

I mean this:  When a carpenter is ill he asks the physician for a rough
and ready cure; an emetic or a purge or a cautery or the knife,--
these are his remedies.  And if some one prescribes for him a course
of dietetics, and tells him that he must swathe and swaddle his head,
and all that sort of thing, he replies at once that he has no time
to be ill, and that he sees no good in a life which is spent
in nursing his disease to the neglect of his customary employment;
and therefore bidding good-bye to this sort of physician, he resumes
his ordinary habits, and either gets well and lives and does
his business, or, if his constitution falls, he dies and has no
more trouble.

Yes, he said, and a man in his condition of life ought to use
the art of medicine thus far only.

Has he not, I said, an occupation; and what profit would there
be in his life if he were deprived of his occupation?

Quite true, he said.

But with the rich man this is otherwise; of him we do not say
that he has any specially appointed work which he must perform,
if he would live.

He is generally supposed to have nothing to do.

Then you never heard of the saying of Phocylides, that as soon
as a man has a livelihood he should practise virtue?

Nay, he said, I think that he had better begin somewhat sooner.

Let us not have a dispute with him about this, I said; but rather
ask ourselves:  Is the practice of virtue obligatory on the rich man,
or can he live without it?  And if obligatory on him, then let us raise
a further question, whether this dieting of disorders which is an impediment
to the application of the mind t in carpentering and the mechanical
arts, does not equally stand in the way of the sentiment of Phocylides?

Of that, he replied, there can be no doubt; such excessive
care of the body, when carried beyond the rules of gymnastic,
is most inimical to the practice of virtue.

Yes, indeed, I replied, and equally incompatible with the management
of a house, an army, or an office of state; and, what is
most important of all, irreconcilable with any kind of study
or thought or self-reflection--there is a constant suspicion
that headache and giddiness are to be ascribed to philosophy,
and hence all practising or making trial of virtue in the higher
sense is absolutely stopped; for a man is always fancying that
he is being made ill, and is in constant anxiety about the state of his body.

Yes, likely enough.

And therefore our politic Asclepius may be supposed to have
exhibited the power of his art only to persons who, being generally
of healthy constitution and habits of life, had a definite ailment;
such as these he cured by purges and operations, and bade them
live as usual, herein consulting the interests of the State;
but bodies which disease had penetrated through and through he
would not have attempted to cure by gradual processes of evacuation
and infusion:  he did not want to lengthen out good-for-nothing lives,
or to have weak fathers begetting weaker sons;--if a man was not
able to live in the ordinary way he had no business to cure him;
for such a cure would have been of no use either to himself, or to
the State.

Then, he said, you regard Asclepius as a statesman.

Clearly; and his character is further illustrated by his sons. 
Note that they were heroes in the days of old and practised the medicines
of which I am speaking at the siege of Troy:  You will remember how,
when Pandarus wounded Menelaus, they

          Sucked the blood out of the wound, and sprinkled soothing remedies,

but they never prescribed what the patient was afterwards to eat or
drink in the case of Menelaus, any more than in the case of Eurypylus;
the remedies, as they conceived, were enough to heal any man
who before he was wounded was healthy and regular in habits;
and even though he did happen to drink a posset of Pramnian wine,
he might get well all the same.  But they would have nothing to do
with unhealthy and intemperate subjects, whose lives were of no use
either to themselves or others; the art of medicine was not designed
for their good, and though they were as rich as Midas, the sons
of Asclepius would have declined to attend them.

They were very acute persons, those sons of Asclepius.

Naturally so, I replied.  Nevertheless, the tragedians and Pindar
disobeying our behests, although they acknowledge that Asclepius
was the son of Apollo, say also that he was bribed into healing
a rich man who was at the point of death, and for this reason he
was struck by lightning.  But we, in accordance with the principle
already affirmed by us, will not believe them when they tell us both;--
if he was the son of a god, we maintain that hd was not avaricious;
or, if he was avaricious he was not the son of a god.

All that, Socrates, is excellent; but I should like to put a
question to you:  Ought there not to be good physicians in a State,
and are not the best those who have treated the greatest number
of constitutions good and bad? and are not the best judges
in like manner those who are acquainted with all sorts of moral natures?

Yes, I said, I too would have good judges and good physicians. 
But do you know whom I think good?

Will you tell me?

I will, if I can.  Let me however note that in the same question
you join two things which are not the same.

How so? he asked.

Why, I said, you join physicians and judges.  Now the most skilful
physicians are those who, from their youth upwards, have combined
with the knowledge of their art the greatest experience of disease;
they had better not be robust in health, and should have had
all manner of diseases in their own persons.  For the body,
as I conceive, is not the instrument with which they cure the body;
in that case we could not allow them ever to be or to have been sickly;
but they cure the body with the mind, and the mind which has become and
is sick can cure nothing.

That is very true, he said.

But with the judge it is otherwise; since he governs mind by mind;
he ought not therefore to have been trained among vicious minds,
and to have associated with them from youth upwards, and to have
gone through the whole calendar of crime, only in order that he
may quickly infer the crimes of others as he might their bodily
diseases from his own self-consciousness; the honourable mind
which is to form a healthy judgment should have had no experience
or contamination of evil habits when young.  And this is the reason
why in youth good men often appear to be simple, and are easily
practised upon by the dishonest, because they have no examples
of what evil is in their own souls.

Yes, he said, they are far too apt to be deceived.

Therefore, I said, the judge should not be young; he should
have learned to know evil, not from his own soul, but from
late and long observation of the nature of evil in others: 
knowledge should be his guide, not personal experience.

Yes, he said, that is the ideal of a judge.

Yes, I replied, and he will be a good man (which is my answer to
your question); for he is good who has a good soul.  But the cunning
and suspicious nature of which we spoke,--he who has committed
many crimes, and fancies himself to be a master in wickedness,
when he is amongst his fellows, is wonderful in the precautions
which he takes, because he judges of them by himself:  but when he gets
into the company of men of virtue, who have the experience of age,
he appears to be a fool again, owing to his unseasonable suspicions;
he cannot recognise an honest man, because he has no pattern of
honesty in himself; at the same time, as the bad are more numerous
than the good, and he meets with them oftener, he thinks himself,
and is by others thought to be, rather wise than foolish.

Most true, he said.

Then the good and wise judge whom we are seeking is not this man,
but the other; for vice cannot know virtue too, but a virtuous nature,
educated by time, will acquire a knowledge both of virtue and vice: 
the virtuous, and not the vicious, man has wisdom--in my opinion.

And in mine also.

This is the sort of medicine, and this is the sort of law, which you
sanction in your State.  They will minister to better natures,
giving health both of soul and of body; but those who are diseased
in their bodies they will leave to die, and the corrupt and incurable
souls they will put an end to themselves.

That is clearly the best thing both for the patients and for the State.

And thus our youth, having been educated only in that simple music which,
as we said, inspires temperance, will be reluctant to go to law.

Clearly.

And the musician, who, keeping to the same track,
is content to practise the simple gymnastic,
will have nothing to do with medicine unless in some extreme case.

That I quite believe.

The very exercises and tolls which he undergoes are intended to
stimulate the spirited element of his nature, and not to increase
his strength; he will not, like common athletes, use exercise
and regimen to develop his muscles.

Very right, he said.

Neither are the two arts of music and gymnastic really designed,
as is often supposed, the one for the training of the soul,
the other fir the training of the body.

What then is the real object of them?

I believe, I said, that the teachers of both have in view chiefly
the improvement of the soul.

How can that be? he asked.

Did you never observe, I said, the effect on the mind itself
of exclusive devotion to gymnastic, or the opposite effect
of an exclusive devotion to music?

In what way shown? he said.

The one producing a temper of hardness and ferocity, the other
of softness and effeminacy, I replied.

Yes, he said, I am quite aware that the mere athlete becomes too
much of a savage, and that the mere musician is melted and softened
beyond what is good for him.

Yet surely, I said, this ferocity only comes from spirit, which,
if rightly educated, would give courage, but, if too much intensified,
is liable to become hard and brutal.

That I quite think.

On the other hand the philosopher will have the quality of gentleness. 
And this also, when too much indulged, will turn to softness, but,
if educated rightly, will be gentle and moderate.

True.

And in our opinion the guardians ought to have both these qualities?

Assuredly.

And both should be in harmony?

Beyond question.

And the harmonious soul is both temperate and courageous?

Yes.

And the inharmonious is cowardly and boorish?

Very true.

And, when a man allows music to play upon him and to pour
into his soul through the funnel of his ears those sweet and
soft and melancholy airs of which we were just now speaking,
and his whole life is passed in warbling and the delights of song;
in the first stage of the process the passion or spirit which is
in him is tempered like iron, and made useful, instead of brittle
and useless.  But, if he carries on the softening and soothing process,
in the next stage he begins to melt and waste, until he has
wasted away his spirit and cut out the sinews of his soul;
and he becomes a feeble warrior.

Very true.

If the element of spirit is naturally weak in him the change is
speedily accomplished, but if he have a good deal, then the power
of music weakening the spirit renders him excitable;--on the least
provocation he flames up at once, and is speedily extinguished;
instead of having spirit he grows irritable and passionate and is
quite impracticable.

Exactly.

And so in gymnastics, if a man takes violent exercise and is
a great feeder, and the reverse of a great student of music
and philosophy, at first the high condition of his body fills
him with pride and spirit, and lie becomes twice the man that he was.

Certainly.

And what happens? if he do nothing else, and holds no con-a verse
with the Muses, does not even that intelligence which there may be
in him, having no taste of any sort of learning or enquiry or thought
or culture, grow feeble and dull and blind, his mind never waking up
or receiving nourishment, and his senses not being purged of their mists?

True, he said.

And he ends by becoming a hater of philosophy, uncivilized,
never using the weapon of persuasion,--he is like a wild beast,
all violence and fierceness, and knows no other way of dealing;
and he lives in all ignorance and evil conditions, and has no sense
of propriety and grace.

That is quite true, he said.

And as there are two principles of human nature, one the spirited
and the other the philosophical, some God, as I should say,
has given mankind two arts answering to them (and only indirectly
to the soul and body), in order that these two principles
(like the strings of an instrument) may be relaxed or drawn tighter
until they are duly harmonised.

That appears to be the intention.

And he who mingles music with gymnastic in the fairest proportions,
and best attempers them to the soul, may be rightly called the true
musician and harmonist in a far higher sense than the tuner
of the strings.

You are quite right, Socrates.

And such a presiding genius will be always required in our State
if the government is to last.

Yes, he will be absolutely necessary.

Such, then, are our principles of nurture and education: 
Where would be the use of going into further details about the dances
of our citizens, or about their hunting and coursing, their gymnastic
and equestrian contests?  For these all follow the general principle,
and having found that, we shall have no difficulty in discovering them.

I dare say that there will be no difficulty.

Very good, I said; then what is the next question?  Must we not ask
who are to be rulers and who subjects?

Certainly.

There can be no doubt that the elder must rule the younger.

Clearly.

And that the best of these must rule.

That is also clear.

Now, are not the best husbandmen those who are most devoted
to husbandry?

Yes.

And as we are to have the best of guardians for our city, must they
not be those who have most the character of guardians?

Yes.

And to this end they ought to be wise and efficient, and to have
a special care of the State?

True.

And a man will be most likely to care about that which he loves?

To be sure.

And he will be most likely to love that which he regards as having
the same interests with himself, and that of which the good or evil
fortune is supposed by him at any time most to affect his own?

Very true, he replied.

Then there must be a selection.  Let us note among the guardians
those who in their whole life show the greatest eagerness to do
what is for the good of their country, and the greatest repugnance
to do what is against her interests.

Those are the right men.

And they will have to be watched at every age, in order that we
may see whether they preserve their resolution, and never,
under the influence either of force or enchantment, forget or cast
off their sense of duty to the State.

How cast off? he said.

I will explain to you, I replied.  A resolution may go out
of a man's mind either with his will or against his will;
with his will when he gets rid of a falsehood and learns better,
against his will whenever he is deprived of a truth.

I understand, he said, the willing loss of a resolution;
the meaning of the unwilling I have yet to learn.

Why, I said, do you not see that men are unwillingly deprived of good,
and willingly of evil?  Is not to have lost the truth an evil,
and to possess the truth a good? and you would agree that to conceive
things as they are is to possess the truth?

Yes, he replied; I agree with you in thinking that mankind are
deprived of truth against their will.

And is not this involuntary deprivation caused either by theft,
or force, or enchantment?

Still, he replied, I do not understand you.

I fear that I must have been talking darkly, like the tragedians. 
I only mean that some men are changed by persuasion and that others forget;
argument steals away the hearts of one class, and time of the other;
and this I call theft.  Now you understand me?

Yes.

Those again who are forced are those whom the violence of some pain
or grief compels to change their opinion.

I understand, he said, and you are quite right.

And you would also acknowledge that the enchanted are those who
change their minds either under the softer influence of pleasure,
or the sterner influence of fear?

Yes, he said; everything that deceives may be said to enchant.

Therefore, as I was just now saying, we must enquire who are
the best guardians of their own conviction that what they think
the interest of the State is to be the rule of their lives. 
We must watch them from their youth upwards, and make them perform
actions in which they are most likely to forget or to be deceived,
and he who remembers and is not deceived is to be selected,
and he who falls in the trial is to be rejected.  That will be
the way?

Yes.

And there should also be toils and pains and conflicts prescribed
for them, in which they will be made to give further proof
of the same qualities.

Very right, he replied.

And then, I said, we must try them with enchantments that is
the third sort of test--and see what will be their behaviour: 
like those who take colts amid noise and tumult to see if they are
of a timid nature, so must we take our youth amid terrors of some kind,
and again pass them into pleasures, and prove them more thoroughly
than gold is proved in the furnace, that we may discover whether they
are armed against all enchantments, and of a noble bearing always,
good guardians of themselves and of the music which they have learned,
and retaining under all circumstances a rhythmical and harmonious nature,
such as will be most serviceable to the individual and to the State. 
And he who at every age, as boy and youth and in mature life,
has come out of the trial victorious and pure, shall be appointed
a ruler and guardian of the State; he shall be honoured in life
and death, and shall receive sepulture and other memorials of honour,
the greatest that we have to give.  But him who fails, we must reject. 
I am inclined to think that this is the sort of way in which our rulers
and guardians should be chosen and appointed.  I speak generally,
and not with any pretension to exactness.

And, speaking generally, I agree with you, he said.

And perhaps the word `guardian' in the fullest sense ought to be
applied to this higher class only who preserve us against foreign
enemies and maintain peace among our citizens at home, that the one
may not have the will, or the others the power, to harm us. 
The young men whom we before called guardians may be more properly
designated auxiliaries and supporters of the principles of the rulers.

I agree with you, he said.

How then may we devise one of those needful falsehoods of which we
lately spoke--just one royal lie which may deceive the rulers,
if that be possible, and at any rate the rest of the city?

What sort of lie? he said.

Nothing new, I replied; only an old Phoenician tale of what has
often occurred before now in other places, (as the poets say,
and have made the world believe,) though not in our time,
and I do not know whether such an event could ever happen again,
or could now even be made probable, if it did.

How your words seem to hesitate on your lips!

You will not wonder, I replied, at my hesitation when you have heard.

Speak, he said, and fear not.

Well then, I will speak, although I really know not how to look
you in the face, or in what words to utter the audacious fiction,
which I propose to communicate gradually, first to the rulers,
then to the soldiers, and lastly to the people.  They are to be
told that their youth was a dream, and the education and training
which they received from us, an appearance only; in reality during
all that time they were being formed and fed in the womb of the earth,
where they themselves and their arms and appurtenances were manufactured;
when they were completed, the earth, their mother, sent them up;
and so, their country being their mother and also their nurse,
they are bound to advise for her good, and to defend her against attacks,
and her citizens they are to regard as children of the earth and their
own brothers.

You had good reason, he said, to be ashamed of the lie which you
were going to tell.

True, I replied, but there is more coming; I have only told you half. 
Citizens, we shall say to them in our tale, you are brothers,
yet God has framed you differently.  Some of you have the power
of command, and in the composition of these he has mingled gold,
wherefore also they have the greatest honour; others he has
made of silver, to be auxillaries; others again who are to be
husbandmen and craftsmen he has composed of brass and iron;
and the species will generally be preserved in the children. 
But as all are of the same original stock, a golden parent will
sometimes have a silver son, or a silver parent a golden son. 
And God proclaims as a first principle to the rulers, and above all else,
that there is nothing which should so anxiously guard, or of which
they are to be such good guardians, as of the purity of the race. 
They should observe what elements mingle in their off spring;
for if the son of a golden or silver parent has an admixture
of brass and iron, then nature orders a transposition of ranks,
and the eye of the ruler must not be pitiful towards the child
because he has to descend in the scale and become a husbandman
or artisan, just as there may be sons of artisans who having
an admixture of gold or silver in them are raised to honour,
and become guardians or auxiliaries.  For an oracle says that when
a man of brass or iron guards the State, it will be destroyed. 
Such is the tale; is there any possibility of making our citizens believe
in it?

Not in the present generation, he replied; there is no way of
accomplishing this; but their sons may be made to believe in the tale,
and their sons' sons, and posterity after them.

I see the difficulty, I replied; yet the fostering of such a belief
will make them care more for the city and for one another. 
Enough, however, of the fiction, which may now fly abroad upon
the wings of rumour, while we arm our earth-born heroes, and lead
them forth under the command of their rulers.  Let them look round
and select a spot whence they can best suppress insurrection,
if any prove refractory within, and also defend themselves
against enemies, who like wolves may come down on the fold
from without; there let them encamp, and when they have encamped,
let them sacrifice to the proper Gods and prepare their dwellings.

Just so, he said.

And their dwellings must be such as will shield them against the cold
of winter and the heat of summer.

I suppose that you mean houses, he replied.

Yes, I said; but they must be the houses of soldiers, and not
of shop-keepers.

What is the difference? he said.

That I will endeavour to explain, I replied.  To keep watchdogs,
who, from want of discipline or hunger, or some evil habit,
or evil habit or other, would turn upon the sheep and worry them,
and behave not like dogs but wolves, would be a foul and monstrous
thing in a shepherd?

Truly monstrous, he said.

And therefore every care must be taken that our auxiliaries,
being stronger than our citizens, may not grow to be too much
for them and become savage tyrants instead of friends and allies?

Yes, great care should be taken.

And would not a really good education furnish the best safeguard?

But they are well-educated already, he replied.

I cannot be so confident, my dear Glaucon, I said; I am much certain
that they ought to be, and that true education, whatever that may be,
will have the greatest tendency to civilize and humanize them
in their relations to one another, and to those who are under
their protection.

Very true, he replied.

And not only their education, but their habitations, and all that
belongs to them, should be such as will neither impair their virtue
as guardians, nor tempt them to prey upon the other citizens. 
Any man of sense must acknowledge that.

He must.

Then let us consider what will be their way of life, if they are
to realize our idea of them.  In the first place, none of them should
have any property of his own beyond what is absolutely necessary;
neither should they have a private house or store closed against any one
who has a mind to enter; their provisions should be only such as are
required by trained warriors, who are men of temperance and courage;
they should agree to receive from the citizens a fixed rate of pay,
enough to meet the expenses of the year and no more; and they will go
and live together like soldiers in a camp.  Gold and silver we will
tell them that they have from God; the diviner metal is within them,
and they have therefore no need of the dross which is current among men,
and ought not to pollute the divine by any such earthly admixture;
for that commoner metal has been the source of many unholy deeds,
but their own is undefiled.  And they alone of all the citizens
may not touch or handle silver or gold, or be under the same roof
with them, or wear them, or drink from them.  And this will be
their salvation, and they will be the saviours of the State. 
But should they ever acquire homes or lands or moneys of their own,
they will become housekeepers and husbandmen instead of guardians,
enemies and tyrants instead of allies of the other citizens;
hating and being hated, plotting and being plotted against,
they will pass their whole life in much greater terror
of internal than of external enemies, and the hour of ruin,
both to themselves and to the rest of the State, will be at hand. 
For all which reasons may we not say that thus shall our State
be ordered, and that these shall be the regulations appointed
by us for guardians concerning their houses and all other matters?
other

Yes, said Glaucon.

BOOK IV

ADEIMANTUS - SOCRATES

HERE Adeimantus interposed a question:  How would you answer,
Socrates, said he, if a person were to say that you are making these
people miserable, and that they are the cause of their own unhappiness;
the city in fact belongs to them, but they are none the better for it;
whereas other men acquire lands, and build large and handsome houses,
and have everything handsome about them, offering sacrifices
to the gods on their own account, and practising hospitality;
moreover, as you were saying just now, they have gold and silver,
and all that is usual among the favourites of fortune; but our poor
citizens are no better than mercenaries who are quartered in the city
and are always mounting guard?

Yes, I said; and you may add that they are only fed, and not paid
in addition to their food, like other men; and therefore they cannot,
if they would, take a journey of pleasure; they have no money to spend
on a mistress or any other luxurious fancy, which, as the world goes,
is thought to be happiness; and many other accusations of the same
nature might be added.

But, said he, let us suppose all this to be included in the charge.

You mean to ask, I said, what will be our answer?

Yes.

If we proceed along the old path, my belief, I said, is that we
shall find the answer.  And our answer will be that, even as
they are, our guardians may very likely be the happiest of men;
but that our aim in founding the State was not the disproportionate
happiness of any one class, but the greatest happiness of the whole;
we thought that in a State which is ordered with a view to
the good of the whole we should be most likely to find Justice,
and in the ill-ordered State injustice:  and, having found them,
we might then decide which of the two is the happier.  At present,
I take it, we are fashioning the happy State, not piecemeal,
or with a view of making a few happy citizens, but as a whole;
and by-and-by we will proceed to view the opposite kind of State. 
Suppose that we were painting a statue, and some one came up to us
and said, Why do you not put the most beautiful colours on the most
beautiful parts of the body--the eyes ought to be purple, but you
have made them black--to him we might fairly answer, Sir, you would
not surely have us beautify the eyes to such a degree that they
are no longer eyes; consider rather whether, by giving this and
the other features their due proportion, we make the whole beautiful. 
And so I say to you, do not compel us to assign to the guardians
a sort of happiness which will make them anything but guardians;
for we too can clothe our husbandmen in royal apparel, and set
crowns of gold on their heads, and bid them till the ground as much
as they like, and no more.  Our potters also might be allowed to repose
on couches, and feast by the fireside, passing round the winecup,
while their wheel is conveniently at hand, and working at pottery
only as much as they like; in this way we might make every class
happy-and then, as you imagine, the whole State would be happy. 
But do not put this idea into our heads; for, if we listen to you,
the husbandman will be no longer a husbandman, the potter will cease
to be a potter, and no one will have the character of any distinct
class in the State.  Now this is not of much consequence where
the corruption of society, and pretension to be what you are not,
is confined to cobblers; but when the guardians of the laws
and of the government are only seemingly and not real guardians,
then see how they turn the State upside down; and on the other hand
they alone have the power of giving order and happiness to the State. 
We mean our guardians to be true saviours and not the destroyers of
the State, whereas our opponent is thinking of peasants at a festival,
who are enjoying a life of revelry, not of citizens who are doing
their duty to the State.  But, if so, we mean different things,
and he is speaking of something which is not a State.  And therefore
we must consider whether in appointing our guardians we would look
to their greatest happiness individually, or whether this principle
of happiness does not rather reside in the State as a whole. 
But the latter be the truth, then the guardians and auxillaries,
and all others equally with them, must be compelled or induced
to do their own work in the best way.  And thus the whole
State will grow up in a noble order, and the several classes
will receive the proportion of happiness which nature assigns to
them.

I think that you are quite right.

I wonder whether you will agree with another remark which occurs
to me.

What may that be?

There seem to be two causes of the deterioration of the arts.

What are they?

Wealth, I said, and poverty.

How do they act?

The process is as follows:  When a potter becomes rich, will he,
think you, any longer take the same pains with his art?

Certainly not.

He will grow more and more indolent and careless?

Very true.

And the result will be that he becomes a worse potter?

Yes; he greatly deteriorates.

But, on the other hand, if he has no money, and cannot provide
himself tools or instruments, he will not work equally well himself,
nor will he teach his sons or apprentices to work equally well.

Certainly not.

Then, under the influence either of poverty or of wealth,
workmen and their work are equally liable to degenerate?

That is evident.

Here, then, is a discovery of new evils, I said, against which the
guardians will have to watch, or they will creep into the city unobserved.

What evils?

Wealth, I said, and poverty; the one is the parent of luxury and indolence,
and the other of meanness and viciousness, and both of discontent.

That is very true, he replied; but still I should like to know,
Socrates, how our city will be able to go to war, especially against
an enemy who is rich and powerful, if deprived of the sinews of war.

There would certainly be a difficulty, I replied, in going to war
with one such enemy; but there is no difficulty where there
are two of them.

How so? he asked.

In the first place, I said, if we have to fight, our side will
be trained warriors fighting against an army of rich men.

That is true, he said.

And do you not suppose, Adeimantus, that a
single boxer who was perfect in his art would
easily be a match for two stout and well-to-do gentlemen who were not boxers?

Hardly, if they came upon him at once.

What, not, I said, if he were able to run away and then turn and strike
at the one who first came up?  And supposing he were to do this
several times under the heat of a scorching sun, might he not,
being an expert, overturn more than one stout personage?

Certainly, he said, there would be nothing wonderful in that.

And yet rich men probably have a greater superiority in the science
and practice of boxing than they have in military qualities.

Likely enough.

Then we may assume that our athletes will be able to fight
with two or three times their own number?

I agree with you, for I think you right.

And suppose that, before engaging, our citizens send an embassy
to one of the two cities, telling them what is the truth: 
Silver and gold we neither have nor are permitted to have, but you may;
do you therefore come and help us in war, of and take the spoils
of the other city:  Who, on hearing these words, would choose to fight
against lean wiry dogs, rather th than, with the dogs on their side,
against fat and tender sheep?

That is not likely; and yet there might be a danger to the poor
State if the wealth of many States were to be gathered into one.

But how simple of you to use the term State at all of any but our own!

Why so?

You ought to speak of other States in the plural number;
not one of them is a city, but many cities, as they say in the game. 
For indeed any city, however small, is in fact divided into two,
one the city of the poor, the other of the rich; these are at war
with one another; and in either there are many smaller divisions,
and you would be altogether beside the mark if you treated them
all as a single State.  But if you deal with them as many,
and give the wealth or power or persons of the one to the others,
you will always have a great many friends and not many enemies. 
And your State, while the wise order which has now been prescribed
continues to prevail in her, will be the greatest of States,
I do not mean to say in reputation or appearance, but in deed
and truth, though she number not more than a thousand defenders. 
A single State which is her equal you will hardly find, either among
Hellenes or barbarians, though many that appear to be as great and many
times greater.

That is most true, he said.

And what, I said, will be the best limit for our rulers to fix
when they are considering the size of the State and the amount
of territory which they are to include, and beyond which they will not go?

What limit would you propose?

I would allow the State to increase so far as is consistent
with unity; that, I think, is the proper limit.

Very good, he said.

Here then, I said, is another order which will have to be conveyed
to our guardians:  Let our city be accounted neither large nor small,
but one and self-sufficing.

And surely, said he, this is not a very severe order which we
impose upon them.

And the other, said I, of which we were speaking before is lighter still,
-I mean the duty of degrading the offspring of the guardians
when inferior, and of elevating into the rank of guardians
the offspring of the lower classes, when naturally superior. 
The intention was, that, in the case of the citizens generally,
each individual should be put to the use for which nature which
nature intended him, one to one work, and then every man would
do his own business, and be one and not many; and so the whole
city would be one and not many.

Yes, he said; that is not so difficult.

The regulations which we are prescribing, my good Adeimantus, are not,
as might be supposed, a number of great principles, but trifles all,
if care be taken, as the saying is, of the one great thing,--
a thing, however, which I would rather call, not great, but sufficient
for our purpose.

What may that be? he asked.

Education, I said, and nurture:  If our citizens are well educated,
and grow into sensible men, they will easily see their way through
all these, as well as other matters which I omit; such, for example,
as marriage, the possession of women and the procreation of children,
which will all follow the general principle that friends have all things
in common, as the proverb says.

That will be the best way of settling them.

Also, I said, the State, if once started well, moves with accumulating
force like a wheel.  For good nurture and education implant
good constitutions, and these good constitutions taking root
in a good education improve more and more, and this improvement
affects the breed in man as in other animals.

Very possibly, he said.

Then to sum up:  This is the point to which, above all, the attention
of our rulers should be directed,--that music and gymnastic
be preserved in their original form, and no innovation made. 
They must do their utmost to maintain them intact.  And when any
one says that mankind most regard

          The newest song which the singers have,

they will be afraid that he may be praising, not new songs,
but a new kind of song; and this ought not to be praised,
or conceived to be the meaning of the poet; for any musical innovation
is full of danger to the whole State, and ought to be prohibited. 
So Damon tells me, and I can quite believe him;-he says that when modes
of music change, of the State always change with them.

Yes, said Adeimantus; and you may add my suffrage to Damon's
and your own.

Then, I said, our guardians must lay the foundations of their
fortress in music?

Yes, he said; the lawlessness of which you speak too easily steals in.

Yes, I replied, in the form of amusement; and at first sight it
appears harmless.

Why, yes, he said, and there is no harm; were it not that little by
little this spirit of licence, finding a home, imperceptibly penetrates
into manners and customs; whence, issuing with greater force,
it invades contracts between man and man, and from contracts goes
on to laws and constitutions, in utter recklessness, ending at last,
Socrates, by an overthrow of all rights, private as well as public.

Is that true?  I said.

That is my belief, he replied.

Then, as I was saying, our youth should be trained
from the first in a stricter system, for if amusements
become lawless, and the youths themselves become lawless,
they can never grow up into well-conducted and virtuous citizens.

Very true, he said.

And when they have made a good beginning in play, and by the help
of music have gained the habit of good order, then this habit of order,
in a manner how unlike the lawless play of the others! will accompany
them in all their actions and be a principle of growth to them,
and if there be any fallen places a principle in the State will raise
them up again.

Very true, he said.

Thus educated, they will invent for themselves any lesser rules
which their predecessors have altogether neglected.

What do you mean?

I mean such things as these:--when the young are to be silent
before their elders; how they are to show respect to them
by standing and making them sit; what honour is due to parents;
what garments or shoes are to be worn; the mode of dressing the hair;
deportment and manners in general.  You would agree with me?

Yes.

But there is, I think, small wisdom in legislating about such matters,--
I doubt if it is ever done; nor are any precise written enactments
about them likely to be lasting.

Impossible.

It would seem, Adeimantus, that the direction in which education
starts a man, will determine his future life.  Does not like always
attract like?

To be sure.

Until some one rare and grand result is reached which may be good,
and may be the reverse of good?

That is not to be denied.

And for this reason, I said, I shall not attempt to legislate
further about them.

Naturally enough, he replied.

Well, and about the business of the agora, dealings and the ordinary
dealings between man and man, or again about agreements with the
commencement with artisans; about insult and injury, of the commencement
of actions, and the appointment of juries, what would you say? there
may also arise questions about any impositions and extractions
of market and harbour dues which may be required, and in general
about the regulations of markets, police, harbours, and the like. 
But, oh heavens! shall we condescend to legislate on any of these particulars?

I think, he said, that there is no need to impose laws about them
on good men; what regulations are necessary they will find out soon
enough for themselves.

Yes, I said, my friend, if God will only preserve to them the laws
which we have given them.

And without divine help, said Adeimantus, they will go on for
ever making and mending their laws and their lives in the hope
of attaining perfection.

You would compare them, I said, to those invalids who, having no
self-restraint, will not leave off their habits of intemperance?

Exactly.

Yes, I said; and what a delightful life they lead! they are always
doctoring and increasing and complicating their disorders,
and always fancying that they will be cured by any nostrum
which anybody advises them to try.

Such cases are very common, he said, with invalids of this sort.

Yes, I replied; and the charming thing is that they deem him
their worst enemy who tells them the truth, which is simply that,
unless they give up eating and drinking and wenching and idling,
neither drug nor cautery nor spell nor amulet nor any other remedy
will avail.

Charming! he replied.  I see nothing charming in going into a passion
with a man who tells you what is right.

These gentlemen, I said, do not seem to be in your good graces.

Assuredly not.

Nor would you praise the behaviour of States which act like the men whom
I was just now describing.  For are there not ill-ordered States in which
the citizens are forbidden under pain of death to alter the constitution;
and yet he who most sweetly courts those who live under this regime
and indulges them and fawns upon them and is skilful in anticipating
and gratifying their humours is held to be a great and good statesman--
do not these States resemble the persons whom I was describing?

Yes, he said; the States are as bad as the men; and I am very far
from praising them.

But do you not admire, I said, the coolness and dexterity
of these ready ministers of political corruption?

Yes, he said, I do; but not of all of them, for there are some whom
the applause of the multitude has deluded into the belief that they
are really statesmen, and these are not much to be admired.

What do you mean?  I said; you should have more feeling for them. 
When a man cannot measure, and a great many others who cannot measure
declare that he is four cubits high, can he help believing what
they say?

Nay, he said, certainly not in that case.

Well, then, do not be angry with them; for are they not as good as
a play, trying their hand at paltry reforms such as I was describing;
they are always fancying that by legislation they will make
an end of frauds in contracts, and the other rascalities which I
was mentioning, not knowing that they are in reality cutting off
the heads of a hydra?

Yes, he said; that is just what they are doing.

I conceive, I said, that the true legislator will not trouble
himself with this class of enactments whether concerning laws or
the constitution either in an ill-ordered or in a well-ordered State;
for in the former they are quite useless, and in the latter
there will be no difficulty in devising them; and many of them
will naturally flow out of our previous regulations.

What, then, he said, is still remaining to us of the work of legislation?

Nothing to us, I replied; but to Apollo, the God of Delphi,
there remains the ordering of the greatest and noblest and chiefest
things of all.

Which are they? he said.

The institution of temples and sacrifices, and the entire service
of gods, demigods, and heroes; also the ordering of the repositories
of the dead, and the rites which have to be observed by him who would
propitiate the inhabitants of the world below.  These are matters
of which we are ignorant ourselves, and as founders of a city we should
be unwise in trusting them to any interpreter but our ancestral deity. 
He is the god who sits in the center, on the navel of the earth,
and he is the interpreter of religion to all mankind.

You are right, and we will do as you propose.

But where, amid all this, is justice? son of Ariston, tell me where. 
Now that our city has been made habitable, light a candle and search,
and get your brother and Polemarchus and the rest of our friends to help,
and let us see where in it we can discover justice and where injustice,
and in what they differ from one another, and which of them the man
who would be happy should have for his portion, whether seen or unseen
by gods and men.

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

Nonsense, said Glaucon:  did you not promise to search yourself,
saying that for you not to help justice in her need would be
an impiety?

I do not deny that I said so, and as you remind me, I will be
as good as my word; but you must join.

We will, he replied.

Well, then, I hope to make the discovery in this way:  I mean
to begin with the assumption that our State, if rightly ordered,
is perfect.

That is most certain.

And being perfect, is therefore wise and valiant and temperate
and just.

That is likewise clear.

And whichever of these qualities we find in the State, the one
which is not found will be the residue?

Very good.

If there were four things, and we were searching for one of them,
wherever it might be, the one sought for might be known to us
from the first, and there would be no further trouble; or we
might know the other three first, and then the fourth would clearly
be the one left.

Very true, he said.

And is not a similar method to be pursued about the virtues,
which are also four in number?

Clearly.

First among the virtues found in the State, wisdom comes into view,
and in this I detect a certain peculiarity.

What is that?

The State which we have been describing is said to be wise as being
good in counsel?

Very true.

And good counsel is clearly a kind of knowledge, for not by ignorance,
but by knowledge, do men counsel well?

Clearly.

And the kinds of knowledge in a State are many and diverse?

Of course.

There is the knowledge of the carpenter; but is that the sort
of knowledge which gives a city the title of wise and good in counsel?

Certainly not; that would only give a city the reputation of skill
in carpentering.

Then a city is not to be called wise because possessing a knowledge
which counsels for the best about wooden implements?

Certainly not.

Nor by reason of a knowledge which advises about brazen pots, I said,
nor as possessing any other similar knowledge?

Not by reason of any of them, he said.

Nor yet by reason of a knowledge which cultivates the earth;
that would give the city the name of agricultural?

Yes.

Well, I said, and is there any knowledge in our recently founded
State among any of the citizens which advises, not about any
particular thing in the State, but about the whole, and considers
how a State can best deal with itself and with other States?

There certainly is.

And what is knowledge, and among whom is it found?  I asked.

It is the knowledge of the guardians, he replied, and found among
those whom we were just now describing as perfect guardians.

And what is the name which the city derives from the possession
of this sort of knowledge?

The name of good in counsel and truly wise.

And will there be in our city more of these true guardians
or more smiths?

The smiths, he replied, will be far more numerous.

Will not the guardians be the smallest of all the classes who receive
a name from the profession of some kind of knowledge?

Much the smallest.

And so by reason of the smallest part or class, and of the knowledge
which resides in this presiding and ruling part of itself,
the whole State, being thus constituted according to nature, will be wise;
and this, which has the only knowledge worthy to be called wisdom,
has been ordained by nature to be of all classes the least.

Most true.

Thus, then, I said, the nature and place in the State of one
of the four virtues has somehow or other been discovered.

And, in my humble opinion, very satisfactorily discovered,
he replied.

Again, I said, there is no difficulty in seeing the nature of courage;
and in what part that quality resides which gives the name of
courageous to the State.

How do you mean?

Why, I said, every one who calls any State courageous or cowardly,
will be thinking of the part which fights and goes out to war on
the State's behalf.

No one, he replied, would ever think of any other.

Certainly not.

The rest of the citizens may be courageous or may be cowardly but
their courage or cowardice will not, as I conceive, have the effect
of making the city either the one or the other.

The city will be courageous in virtue of a portion of herself
which preserves under all circumstances that opinion about the nature
of things to be feared and not to be feared in which our legislator
educated them; and this is what you term courage.

I should like to hear what you are saying once more, for I do not
think that I perfectly understand you.

I mean that courage is a kind of salvation.

Salvation of what?

Of the opinion respecting things to be feared, what they are
and of what nature, which the law implants through education;
and I mean by the words `under all circumstances' to intimate that
in pleasure or in pain, or under the influence of desire or fear,
a man preserves, and does not lose this opinion.  Shall I give you
an illustration?

If you please.

You know, I said, that dyers, when they want to dye wool for making
the true sea-purple, begin by selecting their white colour first;
this they prepare and dress with much care and pains, in order
that the white ground may take the purple hue in full perfection. 
The dyeing then proceeds; and whatever is dyed in this manner becomes
a fast colour, and no washing either with lyes or without them can
take away the bloom.  But, when the ground has not been duly prepared,
you will have noticed how poor is the look either of purple or of any
other colour.

Yes, he said; I know that they have a washed-out and ridiculous appearance.

Then now, I said, you will understand what our object was in
selecting our soldiers, and educating them in music and gymnastic;
we were contriving influences which would prepare them to take the dye
of the laws in perfection, and the colour of their opinion about dangers
and of every other opinion was to be indelibly fixed by their nurture
and training, not to be washed away by such potent lyes as pleasure--
mightier agent far in washing the soul than any soda or lye;
or by sorrow, fear, and desire, the mightiest of all other solvents. 
And this sort of universal saving power of true opinion in conformity
with law about real and false dangers I call and maintain to be courage,
unless you disagree.

But I agree, he replied; for I suppose that you mean to exclude mere
uninstructed courage, such as that of a wild beast or of a slave--
this, in your opinion, is not the courage which the law ordains,
and ought to have another name.

Most certainly.

Then I may infer courage to be such as you describe?

Why, yes, said I, you may, and if you add the words `of a citizen,'
you will not be far wrong;--hereafter, if you like, we will carry
the examination further, but at present we are we w seeking not
for courage but justice; and for the purpose of our enquiry we have
said enough.

You are right, he replied.

Two virtues remain to be discovered in the State-first temperance,
and then justice which is the end of our search.

Very true.

Now, can we find justice without troubling ourselves about temperance?

I do not know how that can be accomplished, he said, nor do I desire
that justice should be brought to light and temperance lost sight of;
and therefore I wish that you would do me the favour of considering
temperance first.

Certainly, I replied, I should not be justified in refusing
your request.

Then consider, he said.

Yes, I replied; I will; and as far as I can at present see,
the virtue of temperance has more of the nature of harmony
and symphony than the preceding.

How so? he asked.

Temperance, I replied, is the ordering or controlling of certain
pleasures and desires; this is curiously enough implied in the saying
of `a man being his own master' and other traces of the same notion
may be found in language.

No doubt, he said.

There is something ridiculous in the expression `master of himself';
for the master is also the servant and the servant the master;
and in all these modes of speaking the same person is denoted.

Certainly.

The meaning is, I believe, that in the human soul there is a better
and also a worse principle; and when the better has the worse
under control, then a man is said to be master of himself;
and this is a term of praise:  but when, owing to evil education
or association, the better principle, which is also the smaller,
is overwhelmed by the greater mass of the worse--in this case he is
blamed and is called the slave of self and unprincipled.

Yes, there is reason in that.

And now, I said, look at our newly created State, and there you
will find one of these two conditions realised; for the State,
as you will acknowledge, may be justly called master of itself,
if the words `temperance' and `self-mastery' truly express the rule
of the better part over the worse.

Yes, he said, I see that what you say is true.

Let me further note that the manifold and complex pleasures
and desires and pains are generally found in children and women
and servants, and in the freemen so called who are of the lowest
and more numerous class.

Certainly, he said.

Whereas the simple and moderate desires which follow reason,
and are under the guidance of mind and true opinion, are to be found
only in a few, and those the best born and best educated.

Very true.  These two, as you may perceive, have a place in our State;
and the meaner desires of the are held down by the virtuous desires
and wisdom of the few.

That I perceive, he said.

Then if there be any city which may be described as master of its
own pleasures and desires, and master of itself, ours may claim
such a designation?

Certainly, he replied.

It may also be called temperate, and for the same reasons?

Yes.

And if there be any State in which rulers and subjects will be agreed
as to the question who are to rule, that again will be our State?

Undoubtedly.

And the citizens being thus agreed among themselves, in which class
will temperance be found--in the rulers or in the subjects?

In both, as I should imagine, he replied.

Do you observe that we were not far wrong in our guess that temperance
was a sort of harmony?

Why so?

Why, because temperance is unlike courage and wisdom, each of
which resides in a part only, the one making the State wise and
the other valiant; not so temperance, which extends to the whole,
and runs through all the notes of the scale, and produces a harmony
of the weaker and the stronger and the middle class, whether you
suppose them to be stronger or weaker in wisdom or power or numbers
or wealth, or anything else.  Most truly then may we deem temperance
to be the agreement of the naturally superior and inferior,
as to the right to rule of either, both in states and individuals.

I entirely agree with you.

And so, I said, we may consider three out of the four virtues
to have been discovered in our State.  The last of those qualities
which make a state virtuous must be justice, if we only knew what that was.

The inference is obvious.

The time then has arrived, Glaucon, when, like huntsmen, we should
surround the cover, and look sharp that justice does not steal away,
and pass out of sight and escape us; for beyond a doubt she is somewhere
in this country:  watch therefore and strive to catch a sight of her,
and if you see her first, let me know.

Would that I could! but you should regard me rather as a follower
who has just eyes enough to, see what you show him--that is about
as much as I am good for.

Offer up a prayer with me and follow.

I will, but you must show me the way.

Here is no path, I said, and the wood is dark and perplexing;
still we must push on.

Let us push on.

Here I saw something:  Halloo!  I said, I begin to perceive a track,
and I believe that the quarry will not escape.

Good news, he said.

Truly, I said, we are stupid fellows.

Why so?

Why, my good sir, at the beginning of our enquiry, ages ago,
there was justice tumbling out at our feet, and we never saw her;
nothing could be more ridiculous.  Like people who go about looking
for what they have in their hands--that was the way with us--we looked
not at what we were seeking, but at what was far off in the distance;
and therefore, I suppose, we missed her.

What do you mean?

I mean to say that in reality for a long time past we have been
talking of justice, and have failed to recognise her.

I grow impatient at the length of your exordium.

Well then, tell me, I said, whether I am right or not: 
You remember the original principle which we were always laying
down at the foundation of the State, that one man should practise
one thing only, the thing to which his nature was best adapted;--
now justice is this principle or a part of it.

Yes, we often said that one man should do one thing only.

Further, we affirmed that justice was doing one's own business,
and not being a busybody; we said so again and again, and many others
have said the same to us.

Yes, we said so.

Then to do one's own business in a certain way may be assumed
to be justice.  Can you tell me whence I derive this inference?

I cannot, but I should like to be told.

Because I think that this is the only virtue which remains
in the State when the other virtues of temperance and courage
and wisdom are abstracted; and, that this is the ultimate cause
and condition of the existence of all of them, and while remaining
in them is also their preservative; and we were saying that if
the three were discovered by us, justice would be the fourth or remaining one.

That follows of necessity.

If we are asked to determine which of these four qualities
by its presence contributes most to the excellence of the State,
whether the agreement of rulers and subjects, or the preservation
in the soldiers of the opinion which the law ordains about the true
nature of dangers, or wisdom and watchfulness in the rulers, or whether
this other which I am mentioning, and which is found in children
and women, slave and freeman, artisan, ruler, subject,--the quality,
I mean, of every one doing his own work, and not being a busybody,
would claim the palm--the question is not so easily answered.

Certainly, he replied, there would be a difficulty in saying which.

Then the power of each individual in the State to do his own work appears
to compete with the other political virtues, wisdom, temperance, courage.

Yes, he said.

And the virtue which enters into this competition is justice?

Exactly.

Let us look at the question from another point of view: 
Are not the rulers in a State those to whom you would entrust
the office of determining suits at law?

Certainly.

And are suits decided on any other ground but that a man may neither
take what is another's, nor be deprived of what is his own?

Yes; that is their principle.

Which is a just principle?

Yes.

Then on this view also justice will be admitted to be the having
and doing what is a man's own, and belongs to him?

Very true.

Think, now, and say whether you agree with me or not.  Suppose a carpenter
to be doing the business of a cobbler, or a cobbler of a carpenter;
and suppose them to exchange their implements or their duties,
or the same person to be doing the work of both, or whatever be the change;
do you think that any great harm would result to the State?

Not much.

But when the cobbler or any other man whom nature designed
to be a trader, having his heart lifted up by wealth or strength
or the number of his followers, or any like advantage,
attempts to force his way into the class of warriors, or a warrior
into that of legislators and guardians, for which he is unfitted,
and either to take the implements or the duties of the other;
or when one man is trader, legislator, and warrior all in one,
then I think you will agree with me in saying that this interchange
and this meddling of one with another is the ruin of the State.

Most true.

Seeing then, I said, that there are three distinct classes,
any meddling of one with another, or the change of one into another,
is the greatest harm to the State, and may be most justly termed
evil-doing?

Precisely.

And the greatest degree of evil-doing to one's own city would
be termed by you injustice?

Certainly.

This then is injustice; and on the other hand when the trader,
the auxiliary, and the guardian each do their own business,
that is justice, and will make the city just.

I agree with you.

We will not, I said, be over-positive as yet; but if, on trial,
this conception of justice be verified in the individual as well
as in the State, there will be no longer any room for doubt;
if it be not verified, we must have a fresh enquiry.  First let us
complete the old investigation, which we began, as you remember,
under the impression that, if we could previously examine justice
on the larger scale, there would be less difficulty in discerning
her in the individual.  That larger example appeared to be the State,
and accordingly we constructed as good a one as we could, knowing well
that in the good State justice would be found.  Let the discovery
which we made be now applied to the individual--if they agree,
we shall be satisfied; or, if there be a difference in the individual,
we will come back to the State and have another trial of the theory. 
The friction of the two when rubbed together may possibly strike
a light in which justice will shine forth, and the vision which is
then revealed we will fix in our souls.

That will be in regular course; let us do as you say.

I proceeded to ask:  When two things, a greater and less,
are called by the same name, are they like or unlike in so far
as they are called the same?

Like, he replied.

The just man then, if we regard the idea of justice only,
will be like the just State?

He will.

And a State was thought by us to be just when the three classes
in the State severally did their own business; and also thought
to be temperate and valiant and wise by reason of certain other
affections and qualities of these same classes?

True, he said.

And so of the individual; we may assume that he has the same
three principles in his own soul which are found in the State;
and he may be rightly described in the same terms, because he is
affected in the same manner?

Certainly, he said.

Once more then, O my friend, we have alighted upon an easy question--
whether the soul has these three principles or not?

An easy question!  Nay, rather, Socrates, the proverb holds
that hard is the good.

Very true, I said; and I do not think that the method which we are
employing is at all adequate to the accurate solution of this question;
the true method is another and a longer one.  Still we may arrive
at a solution not below the level of the previous enquiry.

May we not be satisfied with that? he said;--under the circumstances,
I am quite content.

I too, I replied, shall be extremely well satisfied.

Then faint not in pursuing the speculation, he said.

Must we not acknowledge, I said, that in each of us there are
the same principles and habits which there are in the State;
and that from the individual they pass into the State?--how else can
they come there?  Take the quality of passion or spirit;--it would
be ridiculous to imagine that this quality, when found in States,
is not derived from the individuals who are supposed to possess it,
e.g. the Thracians, Scythians, and in general the northern nations;
and the same may be said of the love of knowledge, which is the special
characteristic of our part of the world, or of the love of money,
which may, with equal truth, be attributed to the Phoenicians
and Egyptians.

Exactly so, he said.

There is no difficulty in understanding this.

None whatever.

But the question is not quite so easy when we proceed to ask
whether these principles are three or one; whether, that is to say,
we learn with one part of our nature, are angry with another,
and with a third part desire the satisfaction of our natural appetites;
or whether the whole soul comes into play in each sort of action--
to determine that is the difficulty.

Yes, he said; there lies the difficulty.

Then let us now try and determine whether they are the same or different.

How can we? he asked.

I replied as follows:  The same thing clearly cannot act or be
acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing
at the same time, in contrary ways; and therefore whenever
this contradiction occurs in things apparently the same,
we know that they are really not the same, but different.

Good.

For example, I said, can the same thing be at rest and in motion
at the same time in the same part?

Impossible.

Still, I said, let us have a more precise statement of terms,
lest we should hereafter fall out by the way.  Imagine the case
of a man who is standing and also moving his hands and his head,
and suppose a person to say that one and the same person is in motion
and at rest at the same moment-to such a mode of speech we should object,
and should rather say that one part of him is in motion while another
is at rest.

Very true.

And suppose the objector to refine still further, and to draw
the nice distinction that not only parts of tops, but whole tops,
when they spin round with their pegs fixed on the spot, are at
rest and in motion at the same time (and he may say the same
of anything which revolves in the same spot), his objection would
not be admitted by us, because in such cases things are not at rest
and in motion in the same parts of themselves; we should rather say
that they have both an axis and a circumference, and that the axis
stands still, for there is no deviation from the perpendicular;
and that the circumference goes round.  But if, while revolving,
the axis inclines either to the right or left, forwards or backwards,
then in no point of view can they be at rest.

That is the correct mode of describing them, he replied.

Then none of these objections will confuse us, or incline us to believe
that the same thing at the same time, in the same part or in relation
to the same thing, can act or be acted upon in contrary ways.

Certainly not, according to my way of thinking.

Yet, I said, that we may not be compelled to examine all such objections,
and prove at length that they are untrue, let us assume their absurdity,
and go forward on the understanding that hereafter, if this assumption
turn out to be untrue, all the consequences which follow shall be withdrawn.

Yes, he said, that will be the best way.

Well, I said, would you not allow that assent and dissent,
desire and aversion, attraction and repulsion, are all of
them opposites, whether they are regarded as active or passive
(for that makes no difference in the fact of their opposition)?

Yes, he said, they are opposites.

Well, I said, and hunger and thirst, and the desires in general,
and again willing and wishing,--all these you would refer to the classes
already mentioned.  You would say--would you not?--that the soul
of him who desires is seeking after the object of his desires;
or that he is drawing to himself the thing which he wishes to possess: 
or again, when a person wants anything to be given him, his mind,
longing for the realisation of his desires, intimates his wish to have it
by a nod of assent, as if he had been asked a question?

Very true.

And what would you say of unwillingness and dislike and the absence
of desire; should not these be referred to the opposite class
of repulsion and rejection?

Certainly.

Admitting this to be true of desire generally, let us suppose
a particular class of desires, and out of these we will select hunger
and thirst, as they are termed, which are the most obvious of them?

Let us take that class, he said.

The object of one is food, and of the other drink?

Yes.

And here comes the point:  is not thirst the desire which the soul has
of drink, and of drink only; not of drink qualified by anything else;
for example, warm or cold, or much or little, or, in a word,
drink of any particular sort:  but if the thirst be accompanied by heat,
then the desire is of cold drink; or, if accompanied by cold,
then of warm drink; or, if the thirst be excessive, then the drink
which is desired will be excessive; or, if not great, the quantity
of drink will also be small:  but thirst pure and simple will desire
drink pure and simple, which is the natural satisfaction of thirst,
as food is of hunger?

Yes, he said; the simple desire is, as you say, in every case
of the simple object, and the qualified desire of the qualified object.

But here a confusion may arise; and I should wish to guard against
an opponent starting up and saying that no man desires drink only,
but good drink, or food only, but good food; for good is the universal
object of desire, and thirst being a desire, will necessarily be
thirst after good drink; and the same is true of every other desire.

Yes, he replied, the opponent might have something to say.

Nevertheless I should still maintain, that of relatives
some have a quality attached to either term of the relation;
others are simple and have their correlatives simple.

I do not know what you mean.

Well, you know of course that the greater is relative to the less?

Certainly.

And the much greater to the much less?

Yes.

And the sometime greater to the sometime less, and the greater
that is to be to the less that is to be?

Certainly, he said.

And so of more and less, and of other correlative terms, such as
the double and the half, or again, the heavier and the lighter,
the swifter and the slower; and of hot and cold, and of any
other relatives;--is not this true of all of them?

Yes.

And does not the same principle hold in the sciences?  The object
of science is knowledge (assuming that to be the true definition),
but the object of a particular science is a particular kind of knowledge;
I mean, for example, that the science of house-building is a kind
of knowledge which is defined and distinguished from other kinds
and is therefore termed architecture.

Certainly.

Because it has a particular quality which no other has?

Yes.

And it has this particular quality because it has an object
of a particular kind; and this is true of the other arts and sciences?

Yes.

Now, then, if I have made myself clear, you will understand my
original meaning in what I said about relatives.  My meaning was,
that if one term of a relation is taken alone, the other is
taken alone; if one term is qualified, the other is also qualified. 
I do not mean to say that relatives may not be disparate, or that
the science of health is healthy, or of disease necessarily diseased,
or that the sciences of good and evil are therefore good and evil;
but only that, when the term science is no longer used absolutely,
but has a qualified object which in this case is the nature of health
and disease, it becomes defined, and is hence called not merely science,
but the science of medicine.

I quite understand, and I think as you do.

Would you not say that thirst is one of these essentially relative terms,
having clearly a relation--

Yes, thirst is relative to drink.

And a certain kind of thirst is relative to a certain kind of drink;
but thirst taken alone is neither of much nor little, nor of good nor bad,
nor of any particular kind of drink, but of drink only?

Certainly.

Then the soul of the thirsty one, in so far as he is thirsty,
desires only drink; for this he yearns and tries to obtain it?

That is plain.

And if you suppose something which pulls a thirsty soul away
from drink, that must be different from the thirsty principle
which draws him like a beast to drink; for, as we were saying,
the same thing cannot at the same time with the same part of itself
act in contrary ways about the same.

Impossible.

No more than you can say that the hands of the archer push and pull
the bow at the same time, but what you say is that one hand pushes
and the other pulls.

Exactly so, he replied.

And might a man be thirsty, and yet unwilling to drink?

Yes, he said, it constantly happens.

And in such a case what is one to say?  Would you not say that there
was something in the soul bidding a man to drink, and something
else forbidding him, which is other and stronger than the principle
which bids him?

I should say so.

And the forbidding principle is derived from reason, and that
which bids and attracts proceeds from passion and disease?

Clearly.

Then we may fairly assume that they are two, and that they differ
from one another; the one with which man reasons, we may call
the rational principle of the soul, the other, with which he loves
and hungers and thirsts and feels the flutterings of any other desire,
may be termed the irrational or appetitive, the ally of sundry
pleasures and satisfactions?

Yes, he said, we may fairly assume them to be different.

Then let us finally determine that there are two principles existing
in the soul.  And what of passion, or spirit?  Is it a third,
or akin to one of the preceding?

I should be inclined to say--akin to desire.

Well, I said, there is a story which I remember to have heard, and in
which I put faith.  The story is, that Leontius, the son of Aglaion,
coming up one day from the Piraeus, under the north wall on the outside,
observed some dead bodies lying on the ground at the place of execution. 
He felt a desire to see them, and also a dread and abhorrence of them;
for a time he struggled and covered his eyes, but at length
the desire got the better of him; and forcing them open, he ran
up to the dead bodies, saying, Look, ye wretches, take your fill
of the fair sight.

I have heard the story myself, he said.

The moral of the tale is, that anger at times goes to war with desire,
as though they were two distinct things.

Yes; that is the meaning, he said.

And are there not many other cases in which we observe that when a
man's desires violently prevail over his reason, he reviles himself,
and is angry at the violence within him, and that in this struggle,
which is like the struggle of factions in a State, his spirit
is on the side of his reason;--but for the passionate or spirited
element to take part with the desires when reason that she should not
be opposed, is a sort of thing which thing which I believe that you
never observed occurring in yourself, nor, as I should imagine,
in any one else?

Certainly not.

Suppose that a man thinks he has done a wrong to another, the nobler
he is the less able is he to feel indignant at any suffering,
such as hunger, or cold, or any other pain which the injured person
may inflict upon him--these he deems to be just, and, as I say,
his anger refuses to be excited by them.

True, he said.

But when he thinks that he is the sufferer of the wrong, then he boils
and chafes, and is on the side of what he believes to be justice;
and because he suffers hunger or cold or other pain he is only
the more determined to persevere and conquer.  His noble spirit
will not be quelled until he either slays or is slain; or until he
hears the voice of the shepherd, that is, reason, bidding his dog
bark no more.

The illustration is perfect, he replied; and in our State,
as we were saying, the auxiliaries were to be dogs, and to hear
the voice of the rulers, who are their shepherds.

I perceive, I said, that you quite understand me; there is,
however, a further point which I wish you to consider.

What point?

You remember that passion or spirit appeared at first sight
to be a kind of desire, but now we should say quite the contrary;
for in the conflict of the soul spirit is arrayed on the side
of the rational principle.

Most assuredly.

But a further question arises:  Is passion different from
reason also, or only a kind of reason; in which latter case,
instead of three principles in the soul, there will only be two,
the rational and the concupiscent; or rather, as the State was composed
of three classes, traders, auxiliaries, counsellors, so may there
not be in the individual soul a third element which is passion
or spirit, and when not corrupted by bad education is the natural
auxiliary of reason

Yes, he said, there must be a third.

Yes, I replied, if passion, which has already been shown to be
different from desire, turn out also to be different from reason.

But that is easily proved:--We may observe even in young children
that they are full of spirit almost as soon as they are born,
whereas some of them never seem to attain to the use of reason,
and most of them late enough.

Excellent, I said, and you may see passion equally in brute animals,
which is a further proof of the truth of what you are saying. 
And we may once more appeal to the words of Homer, which have been
already quoted by us,

          He smote his breast, and thus rebuked his soul,

for in this verse Homer has clearly supposed the power which reasons
about the better and worse to be different from the unreasoning
anger which is rebuked by it.

Very true, he said.

And so, after much tossing, we have reached land, and are fairly
agreed that the same principles which exist in the State exist
also in the individual, and that they are three in number.

Exactly.

Must we not then infer that the individual is wise in the same way,
and in virtue of the same quality which makes the State wise?

Certainly.

Also that the same quality which constitutes courage in the State
constitutes courage in the individual, and that both the State
and the individual bear the same relation to all the other virtues?

Assuredly.

And the individual will be acknowledged by us to be just in the same
way in which the State is just?

That follows, of course.

We cannot but remember that the justice of the State consisted
in each of the three classes doing the work of its own class?

We are not very likely to have forgotten, he said.

We must recollect that the individual in whom the several qualities
of his nature do their own work will be just, and will do his own work?

Yes, he said, we must remember that too.

And ought not the rational principle, which is wise, and has
the care of the whole soul, to rule, and the passionate or spirited
principle to be the subject and ally?

Certainly.

And, as we were saying, the united influence of music and gymnastic
will bring them into accord, nerving and sustaining the reason
with noble words and lessons, and moderating and soothing
and civilizing the wildness of passion by harmony and rhythm?

Quite true, he said.

And these two, thus nurtured and educated, and having learned truly
to know their own functions, will rule over the concupiscent,
which in each of us is the largest part of the soul and by nature
most insatiable of gain; over this they will keep guard, lest,
waxing great and strong with the fulness of bodily pleasures,
as they are termed, the concupiscent soul, no longer confined
to her own sphere, should attempt to enslave and rule those who are
not her natural-born subjects, and overturn the whole life of man?

Very true, he said.

Both together will they not be the best defenders of the whole soul
and the whole body against attacks from without; the one counselling,
and the other fighting under his leader, and courageously executing
his commands and counsels?

True.

And he is to be deemed courageous whose spirit retains in pleasure
and in pain the commands of reason about what he ought or ought
not to fear?

Right, he replied.

And him we call wise who has in him that little part which rules,
and which proclaims these commands; that part too being supposed
to have a knowledge of what is for the interest of each of the three
parts and of the whole?

Assuredly.

And would you not say that he is temperate who has these same elements
in friendly harmony, in whom the one ruling principle of reason,
and the two subject ones of spirit and desire are equally agreed
that reason ought to rule, and do not rebel?

Certainly, he said, that is the true account of temperance whether
in the State or individual.

And surely, I said, we have explained again and again how and
by virtue of what quality a man will be just.

That is very certain.

And is justice dimmer in the individual, and is her form different,
or is she the same which we found her to be in the State?

There is no difference in my opinion, he said.

Because, if any doubt is still lingering in our minds, a few
commonplace instances will satisfy us of the truth of what I am saying.

What sort of instances do you mean?

If the case is put to us, must we not admit that the just State,
or the man who is trained in the principles of such a State, will be less
likely than the unjust to make away with a deposit of gold or silver? 
Would any one deny this?

No one, he replied.

Will the just man or citizen ever be guilty of sacrilege or theft,
or treachery either to his friends or to his country?

Never.

Neither will he ever break faith where there have been oaths
or agreements?

Impossible.

No one will be less likely to commit adultery, or to dishonour
his father and mother, or to fall in his religious duties?

No one.

And the reason is that each part of him is doing its own business,
whether in ruling or being ruled?

Exactly so.

Are you satisfied then that the quality which makes such men
and such states is justice, or do you hope to discover some other?

Not I, indeed.

Then our dream has been realised; and the suspicion which we
entertained at the beginning of our work of construction, that some
divine power must have conducted us to a primary form of justice,
has now been verified?

Yes, certainly.

And the division of labour which required the carpenter and the shoemaker
and the rest of the citizens to be doing each his own business,
and not another's, was a shadow of justice, and for that reason
it was of use?

Clearly.

But in reality justice was such as we were describing,
being concerned however, not with the outward man, but with the inward,
which is the true self and concernment of man:  for the just man
does not permit the several elements within him to interfere
with one another, or any of them to do the work of others,--he sets
in order his own inner life, and is his own master and his own law,
and at peace with himself; and when he has bound together the three
principles within him, which may be compared to the higher, lower,
and middle notes of the scale, and the intermediate intervals--
when he has bound all these together, and is no longer many, but has
become one entirely temperate and perfectly adjusted nature, then he
proceeds to act, if he has to act, whether in a matter of property,
or in the treatment of the body, or in some affair of politics
or private business; always thinking and calling that which preserves
and co-operates with this harmonious condition, just and good action,
and the knowledge which presides over it, wisdom, and that which
at any time impairs this condition, he will call unjust action,
and the opinion which presides over it ignorance.

You have said the exact truth, Socrates.

Very good; and if we were to affirm that we had discovered the just
man and the just State, and the nature of justice in each of them,
we should not be telling a falsehood?

Most certainly not.

May we say so, then?

Let us say so.

And now, I said, injustice has to be considered.

Clearly.

Must not injustice be a strife which arises among the three principles--
a meddlesomeness, and interference, and rising up of a part
of the soul against the whole, an assertion of unlawful authority,
which is made by a rebellious subject against a true prince,
of whom he is the natural vassal,--what is all this confusion and
delusion but injustice, and intemperance and cowardice and ignorance,
and every form of vice?

Exactly so.

And if the nature of justice and injustice be known, then the meaning
of acting unjustly and being unjust, or, again, of acting justly,
will also be perfectly clear?

What do you mean? he said.

Why, I said, they are like disease and health; being in the soul
just what disease and health are in the body.

How so? he said.

Why, I said, that which is healthy causes health, and that which
is unhealthy causes disease.

Yes.

And just actions cause justice, and unjust actions cause injustice?

That is certain.

And the creation of health is the institution of a natural order
and government of one by another in the parts of the body;
and the creation of disease is the production of a state of things
at variance with this natural order?

True.

And is not the creation of justice the institution of a natural
order and government of one by another in the parts of the soul,
and the creation of injustice the production of a state of things
at variance with the natural order?

Exactly so, he said.

Then virtue is the health and beauty and well-being of the soul,
and vice the disease and weakness and deformity of the same?

True.

And do not good practices lead to virtue, and evil practices to vice?

Assuredly.

Still our old question of the comparative advantage of justice
and injustice has not been answered:  Which is the more profitable,
to be just and act justly and practise virtue, whether seen
or unseen of gods and men, or to be unjust and act unjustly,
if only unpunished and unreformed?

In my judgment, Socrates, the question has now become ridiculous. 
We know that, when the bodily constitution is gone, life is no
longer endurable, though pampered with all kinds of meats and drinks,
and having all wealth and all power; and shall we be told that when
the very essence of the vital principle is undermined and corrupted,
life is still worth having to a man, if only he be allowed to do
whatever he likes with the single exception that he is not to
acquire justice and virtue, or to escape from injustice and vice;
assuming them both to be such as we have described?

Yes, I said, the question is, as you say, ridiculous.  Still, as we
are near the spot at which we may see the truth in the clearest
manner with our own eyes, let us not faint by the way.

Certainly not, he replied.

Come up hither, I said, and behold the various forms of vice,
those of them, I mean, which are worth looking at.

I am following you, he replied:  proceed.

I said, The argument seems to have reached a height from which,
as from some tower of speculation, a man may look down and see
that virtue is one, but that the forms of vice are innumerable;
there being four special ones which are deserving of note.

What do you mean? he said.

I mean, I replied, that there appear to be as many forms of the soul
as there are distinct forms of the State.

How many?

There are five of the State, and five of the soul, I said.

What are they?

The first, I said, is that which we have been describing,
and which may be said to have two names, monarchy and aristocracy,
accordingly as rule is exercised by one distinguished man or by many.

True, he replied.

But I regard the two names as describing one form only;
for whether the government is in the hands of one or many,
if the governors have been trained in the manner which we have supposed,
the fundamental laws of the State will be maintained.

That is true, he replied.

BOOK V

SOCRATES - GLAUCON - ADEIMANTUS

SUCH is the good and true City or State, and the good and man
is of the same pattern; and if this is right every other is wrong;
and the evil is one which affects not only the ordering of the State,
but also the regulation of the individual soul, and is exhibited in
four forms.

What are they? he said.

I was proceeding to tell the order in which the four evil forms appeared
to me to succeed one another, when Pole marchus, who was sitting
a little way off, just beyond Adeimantus, began to whisper to him: 
stretching forth his hand, he took hold of the upper part of his
coat by the shoulder, and drew him towards him, leaning forward
himself so as to be quite close and saying something in his ear,
of which I only caught the words, `Shall we let him off, or what shall
we do?'

Certainly not, said Adeimantus, raising his voice.

Who is it, I said, whom you are refusing to let off?

You, he said.

I repeated, Why am I especially not to be let off?

Why, he said, we think that you are lazy, and mean to cheat us
out of a whole chapter which is a very important part of the story;
and you fancy that we shall not notice your airy way of proceeding;
as if it were self-evident to everybody, that in the matter of women
and children `friends have all things in common.'

And was I not right, Adeimantus?

Yes, he said; but what is right in this particular case,
like everything else, requires to be explained; for community may be of
many kinds.  Please, therefore, to say what sort of community you mean. 
We have been long expecting that you would tell us something about
the family life of your citizens--how they will bring children into
the world, and rear them when they have arrived, and, in general,
what is the nature of this community of women and children-for we
are of opinion that the right or wrong management of such matters
will have a great and paramount influence on the State for good
or for evil.  And now, since the question is still undetermined,
and you are taking in hand another State, we have resolved,
as you heard, not to let you go until you give an account of all this.

To that resolution, said Glaucon, you may regard me as saying Agreed.

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS - GLAUCON - THRASYMACHUS

And without more ado, said Thrasymachus, you may consider us
all to be equally agreed.

I said, You know not what you are doing in thus assailing me: 
What an argument are you raising about the State!  Just as I
thought that I had finished, and was only too glad that I had
laid this question to sleep, and was reflecting how fortunate I
was in your acceptance of what I then said, you ask me to begin
again at the very foundation, ignorant of what a hornet's nest
of words you are stirring.  Now I foresaw this gathering trouble,
and avoided it.

For what purpose do you conceive that we have come here,
said Thrasymachus,--to look for gold, or to hear discourse?

Yes, but discourse should have a limit.

Yes, Socrates, said Glaucon, and the whole of life is the only limit
which wise men assign to the hearing of such discourses.  But never mind
about us; take heart yourself and answer the question in your own way: 
What sort of community of women and children is this which is
to prevail among our guardians? and how shall we manage the period
between birth and education, which seems to require the greatest care? 
Tell us how these things will be.

Yes, my simple friend, but the answer is the reverse of easy;
many more doubts arise about this than about our previous conclusions. 
For the practicability of what is said may be doubted; and looked at
in another point of view, whether the scheme, if ever so practicable,
would be for the best, is also doubtful.  Hence I feel a reluctance
to approach the subject, lest our aspiration, my dear friend,
should turn out to be a dream only.

Fear not, he replied, for your audience will not be hard upon you;
they are not sceptical or hostile.

I said:  My good friend, I suppose that you mean to encourage me
by these words.

Yes, he said.

Then let me tell you that you are doing just the reverse;
the encouragement which you offer would have been all very well
had I myself believed that I knew what I was talking about: 
to declare the truth about matters of high interest which a man
honours and loves among wise men who love him need occasion no fear
or faltering in his mind; but to carry on an argument when you
are yourself only a hesitating enquirer, which is my condition,
is a dangerous and slippery thing; and the danger is not that I
shall be laughed at (of which the fear would be childish),
but that I shall miss the truth where I have most need to be sure
of my footing, and drag my friends after me in my fall.  And I pray
Nemesis not to visit upon me the words which I am going to utter. 
For I do indeed believe that to be an involuntary homicide is a less
crime than to be a deceiver about beauty or goodness or justice
in the matter of laws.  And that is a risk which I would rather
run among enemies than among friends, and therefore you do well to
encourage me.

Glaucon laughed and said:  Well then, Socrates, in case you
and your argument do us any serious injury you shall be acquitted
beforehand of the and shall not be held to be a deceiver;
take courage then and speak.

Well, I said, the law says that when a man is acquitted he is free
from guilt, and what holds at law may hold in argument.

Then why should you mind?

Well, I replied, I suppose that I must retrace my steps and say
what I perhaps ought to have said before in the proper place. 
The part of the men has been played out, and now properly enough
comes the turn of the women.  Of them I will proceed to speak,
and the more readily since I am invited by you.

For men born and educated like our citizens, the only way, in my opinion,
of arriving at a right conclusion about the possession and use of women
and children is to follow the path on which we originally started,
when we said that the men were to be the guardians and watchdogs
of the herd.

True.

Let us further suppose the birth and education of our women to be
subject to similar or nearly similar regulations; then we shall
see whether the result accords with our design.

What do you mean?

What I mean may be put into the form of a question, I said: 
Are dogs divided into hes and shes, or do they both share equally
in hunting and in keeping watch and in the other duties of dogs? or do
we entrust to the males the entire and exclusive care of the flocks,
while we leave the females at home, under the idea that the bearing
and suckling their puppies is labour enough for them?

No, he said, they share alike; the only difference between them
is that the males are stronger and the females weaker.

But can you use different animals for the same purpose, unless they
are bred and fed in the same way?

You cannot.

Then, if women are to have the same duties as men, they must
have the same nurture and education?

Yes.

The education which was assigned to the men was music and gymnastic.  Yes.

Then women must be taught music and gymnastic and also the art of war,
which they must practise like the men?

That is the inference, I suppose.

I should rather expect, I said, that several of our proposals,
if they are carried out, being unusual, may appear ridiculous.

No doubt of it.

Yes, and the most ridiculous thing of all will be the sight of women
naked in the palaestra, exercising with the men, especially when they
are no longer young; they certainly will not be a vision of beauty,
any more than the enthusiastic old men who in spite of wrinkles
and ugliness continue to frequent the gymnasia.

Yes, indeed, he said:  according to present notions the proposal
would be thought ridiculous.

But then, I said, as we have determined to speak our minds,
we must not fear the jests of the wits which will be directed
against this sort of innovation; how they will talk of women's
attainments both in music and gymnastic, and above all about
their wearing armour and riding upon horseback!

Very true, he replied.

Yet having begun we must go forward to the rough places of the law;
at the same time begging of these gentlemen for once in their life
to be serious.  Not long ago, as we shall remind them, the Hellenes were
of the opinion, which is still generally received among the barbarians,
that the sight of a naked man was ridiculous and improper;
and when first the Cretans and then the Lacedaemonians introduced
the custom, the wits of that day might equally have ridiculed
the innovation.

No doubt.

But when experience showed that to let all things be uncovered was far
better than to cover them up, and the ludicrous effect to the outward
eye vanished before the better principle which reason asserted,
then the man was perceived to be a fool who directs the shafts
of his ridicule at any other sight but that of folly and vice,
or seriously inclines to weigh the beautiful by any other standard
but that of the good.

Very true, he replied.

First, then, whether the question is to be put in jest or in earnest,
let us come to an understanding about the nature of woman:  Is she
capable of sharing either wholly or partially in the actions of men,
or not at all?  And is the art of war one of those arts in which she can
or can not share?  That will be the best way of commencing the enquiry,
and will probably lead to the fairest conclusion.

That will be much the best way.

Shall we take the other side first and begin by arguing against ourselves;
in this manner the adversary's position will not be undefended.

Why not? he said.

Then let us put a speech into the mouths of our opponents.  They will say: 
`Socrates and Glaucon, no adversary need convict you, for you yourselves,
at the first foundation of the State, admitted the principle
that everybody was to do the one work suited to his own nature.' 
And certainly, if I am not mistaken, such an admission was made by us. 
`And do not the natures of men and women differ very much indeed?' 
And we shall reply:  Of course they do.  Then we shall be asked,
`Whether the tasks assigned to men and to women should not
be different, and such as are agreeable to their different natures?' 
Certainly they should.  `But if so, have you not fallen into a
serious inconsistency in saying that men and women, whose natures
are so entirely different, ought to perform the same actions?'--
What defence will you make for us, my good Sir, against any one who offers
these objections?

That is not an easy question to answer when asked suddenly;
and I shall and I do beg of you to draw out the case on our side.

These are the objections, Glaucon, and there are many others of a like kind,
which I foresaw long ago; they made me afraid and reluctant to take
in hand any law about the possession and nurture of women and children.

By Zeus, he said, the problem to be solved is anything but easy.

Why yes, I said, but the fact is that when a man is out of his depth,
whether he has fallen into a little swimming bath or into mid-ocean,
he has to swim all the same.

Very true.

And must not we swim and try to reach the shore:  we will hope
that Arion's dolphin or some other miraculous help may save us?

I suppose so, he said.

Well then, let us see if any way of escape can be found. 
We acknowledged--did we not? that different natures ought to have
different pursuits, and that men's and women's natures are different. 
And now what are we saying?--that different natures ought to have
the same pursuits,--this is the inconsistency which is charged
upon us.

Precisely.

Verily, Glaucon, I said, glorious is the power of the art of contradiction!

Why do you say so?

Because I think that many a man falls into the practice against his will. 
When he thinks that he is reasoning he is really disputing,
just because he cannot define and divide, and so know that of which
he is speaking; and he will pursue a merely verbal opposition
in the spirit of contention and not of fair discussion.

Yes, he replied, such is very often the case; but what has
that to do with us and our argument?

A great deal; for there is certainly a danger of our getting
unintentionally into a verbal opposition.

In what way?

Why, we valiantly and pugnaciously insist upon the verbal truth,
that different natures ought to have different pursuits, but we
never considered at all what was the meaning of sameness or difference
of nature, or why we distinguished them when we assigned different
pursuits to different natures and the same to the same natures.

Why, no, he said, that was never considered by us.

I said:  Suppose that by way of illustration we were to ask
the question whether there is not an opposition in nature between
bald men and hairy men; and if this is admitted by us, then, if bald
men are cobblers, we should forbid the hairy men to be cobblers,
and conversely?

That would be a jest, he said.

Yes, I said, a jest; and why? because we never meant when we
constructed the State, that the opposition of natures should extend
to every difference, but only to those differences which affected
the pursuit in which the individual is engaged; we should have argued,
for example, that a physician and one who is in mind a physician
may be said to have the same nature.

True.

Whereas the physician and the carpenter have different natures?

Certainly.

And if, I said, the male and female sex appear to differ in
their fitness for any art or pursuit, we should say that such
pursuit or art ought to be assigned to one or the other of them;
but if the difference consists only in women bearing and men
begetting children, this does not amount to a proof that a woman differs
from a man in respect of the sort of education she should receive;
and we shall therefore continue to maintain that our guardians
and their wives ought to have the same pursuits.

Very true, he said.

Next, we shall ask our opponent how, in reference to any of the pursuits
or arts of civic life, the nature of a woman differs from that of a man?

That will be quite fair.

And perhaps he, like yourself, will reply that to give a sufficient
answer on the instant is not easy; but after a little reflection
there is no difficulty.

Yes, perhaps.

Suppose then that we invite him to accompany us in the argument,
and then we may hope to show him that there is nothing peculiar in
the constitution of women which would affect them in the administration
of the State.

By all means.

Let us say to him:  Come now, and we will ask you a question:--
when you spoke of a nature gifted or not gifted in any respect,
did you mean to say that one man will acquire a thing easily,
another with difficulty; a little learning will lead the one to discover
a great deal; whereas the other, after much study and application,
no sooner learns than he forgets; or again, did you mean,
that the one has a body which is a good servant to his mind,
while the body of the other is a hindrance to him?-would not these be
the sort of differences which distinguish the man gifted by nature
from the one who is ungifted?

No one will deny that.

And can you mention any pursuit of mankind in which the male sex
has not all these gifts and qualities in a higher degree than
the female?  Need I waste time in speaking of the art of weaving,
and the management of pancakes and preserves, in which womankind
does really appear to be great, and in which for her to be beaten
by a man is of all things the most absurd?

You are quite right, he replied, in maintaining the general
inferiority of the female sex:  although many women are in many
things superior to many men, yet on the whole what you say is true.

And if so, my friend, I said, there is no special faculty of
administration in a state which a woman has because she is a woman,
or which a man has by virtue of his sex, but the gifts of nature
are alike diffused in both; all the pursuits of men are the pursuits
of women also, but in all of them a woman is inferior to a man.

Very true.

Then are we to impose all our enactments on men and none of them
on women?

That will never do.

One woman has a gift of healing, another not; one is a musician,
and another has no music in her nature?

Very true.

And one woman has a turn for gymnastic and military exercises,
and another is unwarlike and hates gymnastics?

Certainly.

And one woman is a philosopher, and another is an enemy of philosophy;
one has spirit, and another is without spirit?

That is also true.

Then one woman will have the temper of a guardian, and another not. 
Was not the selection of the male guardians determined by differences
of this sort?

Yes.

Men and women alike possess the qualities which make a guardian;
they differ only in their comparative strength or weakness.

Obviously.

And those women who have such qualities are to be selected as
the companions and colleagues of men who have similar qualities
and whom they resemble in capacity and in character?

Very true.

And ought not the same natures to have the same pursuits?

They ought.

Then, as we were saying before, there is nothing unnatural
in assigning music and gymnastic to the wives of the guardians--
to that point we come round again.

Certainly not.

The law which we then enacted was agreeable to nature, and therefore
not an impossibility or mere aspiration; and the contrary practice,
which prevails at present, is in reality a violation of nature.

That appears to be true.

We had to consider, first, whether our proposals were possible,
and secondly whether they were the most beneficial?

Yes.

And the possibility has been acknowledged?

Yes.

The very great benefit has next to be established?

Quite so.

You will admit that the same education which makes a man a good
guardian will make a woman a good guardian; for their original
nature is the same?

Yes.

I should like to ask you a question.

What is it?

Would you say that all men are equal in excellence, or is one man
better than another?

The latter.

And in the commonwealth which we were founding do you conceive
the guardians who have been brought up on our model system to be
more perfect men, or the cobblers whose education has been cobbling?

What a ridiculous question!

You have answered me, I replied:  Well, and may we not further say
that our guardians are the best of our citizens?

By far the best.

And will not their wives be the best women?

Yes, by far the best.

And can there be anything better for the interests of the State
than that the men and women of a State should be as good as possible?

There can be nothing better.

And this is what the arts of music and gymnastic, when present
in such manner as we have described, will accomplish?

Certainly.

Then we have made an enactment not only possible but in the highest
degree beneficial to the State?

True.

Then let the wives of our guardians strip, for their virtue will be
their robe, and let them share in the toils of war and the defence
of their country; only in the distribution of labours the lighter
are to be assigned to the women, who are the weaker natures,
but in other respects their duties are to be the same. 
And as for the man who laughs at naked women exercising their bodies
from the best of motives, in his laughter he is plucking

          A fruit of unripe wisdom,

and he himself is ignorant of what he is laughing at, or what he
is about;--for that is, and ever will be, the best of sayings,
That the useful is the noble and the hurtful is the base.

Very true.

Here, then, is one difficulty in our law about women, which we
may say that we have now escaped; the wave has not swallowed us up
alive for enacting that the guardians of either sex should have all
their pursuits in common; to the utility and also to the possibility
of this arrangement the consistency of the argument with itself
bears witness.

Yes, that was a mighty wave which you have escaped.

Yes, I said, but a greater is coming; you will of this when you
see the next.

Go on; let me see.

The law, I said, which is the sequel of this and of all that
has preceded, is to the following effect,--'that the wives of our
guardians are to be common, and their children are to be common,
and no parent is to know his own child, nor any child his parent.'

Yes, he said, that is a much greater wave than the other;
and the possibility as well as the utility of such a law are far
more questionable.

I do not think, I said, that there can be any dispute about
the very great utility of having wives and children in common;
the possibility is quite another matter, and will be very much disputed.

I think that a good many doubts may be raised about both.

You imply that the two questions must be combined, I replied. 
Now I meant that you should admit the utility; and in this way,
as I thought; I should escape from one of them, and then there would
remain only the possibility.

But that little attempt is detected, and therefore you will please
to give a defence of both.

Well, I said, I submit to my fate.  Yet grant me a little favour: 
let me feast my mind with the dream as day dreamers are in
the habit of feasting themselves when they are walking alone;
for before they have discovered any means of effecting their wishes--
that is a matter which never troubles them--they would rather
not tire themselves by thinking about possibilities; but assuming
that what they desire is already granted to them, they proceed
with their plan, and delight in detailing what they mean to do
when their wish has come true--that is a way which they have of
not doing much good to a capacity which was never good for much. 
Now I myself am beginning to lose heart, and I should like,
with your permission, to pass over the question of possibility
at present.  Assuming therefore the possibility of the proposal,
I shall now proceed to enquire how the rulers will carry out
these arrangements, and I shall demonstrate that our plan, if executed,
will be of the greatest benefit to the State and to the guardians. 
First of all, then, if you have no objection, I will endeavour with
your help to consider the advantages of the measure; and hereafter
the question of possibility.

I have no objection; proceed.

First, I think that if our rulers and their auxiliaries are to be
worthy of the name which they bear, there must be willingness
to obey in the one and the power of command in the other;
the guardians must themselves obey the laws, and they must also imitate
the spirit of them in any details which are entrusted to their care.

That is right, he said.

You, I said, who are their legislator, having selected the men,
will now select the women and give them to them;--they must be
as far as possible of like natures with them; and they must live
in common houses and meet at common meals, None of them will have
anything specially his or her own; they will be together, and will
be brought up together, and will associate at gymnastic exercises. 
And so they will be drawn by a necessity of their natures to have
intercourse with each other--necessity is not too strong a word,
I think?

Yes, he said;--necessity, not geometrical, but another sort
of necessity which lovers know, and which is far more convincing
and constraining to the mass of mankind.

True, I said; and this, Glaucon, like all the rest, must proceed
after an orderly fashion; in a city of the blessed, licentiousness is
an unholy thing which the rulers will forbid.

Yes, he said, and it ought not to be permitted.

Then clearly the next thing will be to make matrimony sacred in
the highest degree, and what is most beneficial will be deemed sacred?

Exactly.

And how can marriages be made most beneficial?--that is a question
which I put to you, because I see in your house dogs for hunting,
and of the nobler sort of birds not a few.  Now, I beseech you,
do tell me, have you ever attended to their pairing and breeding?

In what particulars?

Why, in the first place, although they are all of a good sort,
are not some better than others?

True.

And do you breed from them all indifferently, or do you take care
to breed from the best only?

From the best.

And do you take the oldest or the youngest, or only those of ripe age?

I choose only those of ripe age.

And if care was not taken in the breeding, your dogs and birds
would greatly deteriorate?

Certainly.

And the same of horses and animals in general?

Undoubtedly.

Good heavens! my dear friend, I said, what consummate skill will
our rulers need if the same principle holds of the human species!

Certainly, the same principle holds; but why does this involve
any particular skill?

Because, I said, our rulers will often have to practise upon
the body corporate with medicines.  Now you know that when patients
do not require medicines, but have only to be put under a regimen,
the inferior sort of practitioner is deemed to be good enough;
but when medicine has to be given, then the doctor should be more of
a man.

That is quite true, he said; but to what are you alluding?

I mean, I replied, that our rulers will find a considerable dose
of falsehood and deceit necessary for the good of their subjects: 
we were saying that the use of all these things regarded as medicines
might be of advantage.

And we were very right.

And this lawful use of them seems likely to be often needed
in the regulations of marriages and births.

How so?

Why, I said, the principle has been already laid down that the best
of either sex should be united with the best as often, and the inferior
with the inferior, as seldom as possible; and that they should rear
the offspring of the one sort of union, but not of the other,
if the flock is to be maintained in first-rate condition. 
Now these goings on must be a secret which the rulers only know,
or there will be a further danger of our herd, as the guardians may
be termed, breaking out into rebellion.

Very true.

Had we not better appoint certain festivals at which we will bring
together the brides and bridegrooms, and sacrifices will be offered
and suitable hymeneal songs composed by our poets:  the number
of weddings is a matter which must be left to the discretion of
the rulers, whose aim will be to preserve the average of population? 
There are many other things which they will have to consider,
such as the effects of wars and diseases and any similar agencies,
in order as far as this is possible to prevent the State from becoming
either too large or too small.

Certainly, he replied.

We shall have to invent some ingenious kind of lots which the less
worthy may draw on each occasion of our bringing them together,
and then they will accuse their own ill-luck and not the rulers.

To be sure, he said.

And I think that our braver and better youth, besides their other
honours and rewards, might have greater facilities of intercourse
with women given them; their bravery will be a reason, and such
fathers ought to have as many sons as possible.

True.

And the proper officers, whether male or female or both, for offices
are to be held by women as well as by men--

Yes--

The proper officers will take the offspring of the good parents to
the pen or fold, and there they will deposit them with certain nurses
who dwell in a separate quarter; but the offspring of the inferior,
or of the better when they chance to be deformed, will be put away
in some mysterious, unknown place, as they should be.

Yes, he said, that must be done if the breed of the guardians
is to be kept pure.

They will provide for their nurture, and will bring the mothers
to the fold when they are full of milk, taking the greatest possible
care that no mother recognizes her own child; and other wet-nurses
may be engaged if more are required.  Care will also be taken
that the process of suckling shall not be protracted too long;
and the mothers will have no getting up at night or other trouble,
but will hand over all this sort of thing to the nurses and attendants.

You suppose the wives of our guardians to have a fine easy time
of it when they are having children.

Why, said I, and so they ought.  Let us, however, proceed with our scheme. 
We were saying that the parents should be in the prime of life?

Very true.

And what is the prime of life?  May it not be defined as a period
of about twenty years in a woman's life, and thirty in a man's?

Which years do you mean to include?

A woman, I said, at twenty years of age may begin to bear
children to the State, and continue to bear them until forty;
a man may begin at five-and-twenty, when he has passed the point
at which the pulse of life beats quickest, and continue to beget
children until he be fifty-five.

Certainly, he said, both in men and women those years are the prime
of physical as well as of intellectual vigour.

Any one above or below the prescribed ages who takes part in the public
hymeneals shall be said to have done an unholy and unrighteous thing;
the child of which he is the father, if it steals into life,
will have been conceived under auspices very unlike the sacrifices
and prayers, which at each hymeneal priestesses and priest and
the whole city will offer, that the new generation may be better
and more useful than their good and useful parents, whereas his
child will be the offspring of darkness and strange lust.

Very true, he replied.

And the same law will apply to any one of those within the prescribed
age who forms a connection with any woman in the prime of life
without the sanction of the rulers; for we shall say that he
is raising up a bastard to the State, uncertified and unconsecrated.

Very true, he replied.

This applies, however, only to those who are within the specified age: 
after that we allow them to range at will, except that a man
may not marry his daughter or his daughter's daughter, or his
mother or his mother's mother; and women, on the other hand,
are prohibited from marrying their sons or fathers, or son's son
or father's father, and so on in either direction.  And we grant
all this, accompanying the permission with strict orders to prevent
any embryo which may come into being from seeing the light;
and if any force a way to the birth, the parents must understand
that the offspring of such an union cannot be maintained,
and arrange accordingly.

That also, he said, is a reasonable proposition.  But how will they
know who are fathers and daughters, and so on?

They will never know.  The way will be this:--dating from the day
of the hymeneal, the bridegroom who was then married will call
all the male children who are born in the seventh and tenth month
afterwards his sons, and the female children his daughters, and they
will call him father, and he will call their children his grandchildren,
and they will call the elder generation grandfathers and grandmothers. 
All who were begotten at the time when their fathers and mothers
came together will be called their brothers and sisters, and these,
as I was saying, will be forbidden to inter-marry. This, however,
is not to be understood as an absolute prohibition of the marriage
of brothers and sisters; if the lot favours them, and they receive
the sanction of the Pythian oracle, the law will allow them.

Quite right, he replied.

Such is the scheme, Glaucon, according to which the guardians
of our State are to have their wives and families in common. 
And now you would have the argument show that this community is consistent
with the rest of our polity, and also that nothing can be better--
would you not?

Yes, certainly.

Shall we try to find a common basis by asking of ourselves
what ought to be the chief aim of the legislator in making laws
and in the organization of a State,--what is the greatest I good,
and what is the greatest evil, and then consider whether our previous
description has the stamp of the good or of the evil?

By all means.

Can there be any greater evil than discord and distraction and plurality
where unity ought to reign? or any greater good than the bond of unity?

There cannot.

And there is unity where there is community of pleasures and pains--
where all the citizens are glad or grieved on the same occasions of joy
and sorrow?

No doubt.

Yes; and where there is no common but only private feeling a State
is disorganized--when you have one half of the world triumphing
and the other plunged in grief at the same events happening
to the city or the citizens?

Certainly.

Such differences commonly originate in a disagreement about the use
of the terms `mine' and `not mine,' `his' and `not his.'

Exactly so.

And is not that the best-ordered State in which the greatest number
of persons apply the terms `mine' and `not mine' in the same way
to the same thing?

Quite true.

Or that again which most nearly approaches to the condition
of the individual--as in the body, when but a finger of one of us
is hurt, the whole frame, drawn towards the soul as a center and
forming one kingdom under the ruling power therein, feels the hurt
and sympathizes all together with the part affected, and we say
that the man has a pain in his finger; and the same expression
is used about any other part of the body, which has a sensation
of pain at suffering or of pleasure at the alleviation of suffering.

Very true, he replied; and I agree with you that in the best-ordered
State there is the nearest approach to this common feeling
which you describe.

Then when any one of the citizens experiences any good or evil,
the whole State will make his case their own, and will either rejoice
or sorrow with him?

Yes, he said, that is what will happen in a well-ordered State.

It will now be time, I said, for us to return to our State and see
whether this or some other form is most in accordance with these
fundamental principles.

Very good.

Our State like every other has rulers and subjects?

True.

All of whom will call one another citizens?

Of course.

But is there not another name which people give to their rulers
in other States?

Generally they call them masters, but in democratic States they
simply call them rulers.

And in our State what other name besides that of citizens
do the people give the rulers?

They are called saviours and helpers, he replied.

And what do the rulers call the people?

Their maintainers and foster-fathers.

And what do they call them in other States?

Slaves.

And what do the rulers call one another in other States?

Fellow-rulers.

And what in ours?

Fellow-guardians.

Did you ever know an example in any other State of a ruler who would speak
of one of his colleagues as his friend and of another as not being his friend?

Yes, very often.

And the friend he regards and describes as one in whom he has
an interest, and the other as a stranger in whom he has no interest?

Exactly.

But would any of your guardians think or speak of any other guardian
as a stranger?

Certainly he would not; for every one whom they meet will be
regarded by them either as a brother or sister, or father or mother,
or son or daughter, or as the child or parent of those who are thus
connected with him.

Capital, I said; but let me ask you once more:  Shall they be a family
in name only; or shall they in all their actions be true to the name? 
For example, in the use of the word `father,' would the care of a
father be implied and the filial reverence and duty and obedience
to him which the law commands; and is the violator of these duties
to be regarded as an impious and unrighteous person who is not
likely to receive much good either at the hands of God or of man? 
Are these to be or not to be the strains which the children will hear
repeated in their ears by all the citizens about those who are intimated
to them to be their parents and the rest of their kinsfolk?

These, he said, and none other; for what can be more ridiculous
than for them to utter the names of family ties with the lips
only and not to act in the spirit of them?

Then in our city the language of harmony and concord will be more
often beard than in any other.  As I was describing before, when any
one is well or ill, the universal word will be with me `it is well'
or `it is ill.'

Most true.

And agreeably to this mode of thinking and speaking, were we not
saying that they will have their pleasures and pains in common?

Yes, and so they will.

And they will have a common interest in the same thing which they
will alike call `my own,' and having this common interest they
will have a common feeling of pleasure and pain?

Yes, far more so than in other States.

And the reason of this, over and above the general constitution
of the State, will be that the guardians will have a community
of women and children?

That will be the chief reason.

And this unity of feeling we admitted to be the greatest good,
as was implied in our own comparison of a well-ordered State to
the relation of the body and the members, when affected by pleasure
or pain?

That we acknowledged, and very rightly.

Then the community of wives and children among our citizens
is clearly the source of the greatest good to the State?

Certainly.

And this agrees with the other principle which we were affirming,--
that the guardians were not to have houses or lands or any other property;
their pay was to be their food, which they were to receive from
the other citizens, and they were to have no private expenses;
for we intended them to preserve their true character of guardians.

Right, he replied.

Both the community of property and the community of families,
as I am saying, tend to make them more truly guardians; they will not
tear the city in pieces by differing about `mine' and `not mine;'
each man dragging any acquisition which he has made into a separate
house of his own, where he has a separate wife and children and private
pleasures and pains; but all will be affected as far as may be
by the same pleasures and pains because they are all of one opinion
about what is near and dear to them, and therefore they all tend
towards a common end.

Certainly, he replied.

And as they have nothing but their persons which they can call
their own, suits and complaints will have no existence among them;
they will be delivered from all those quarrels of which money or
children or relations are the occasion.

Of course they will.

Neither will trials for assault or insult ever be likely
to occur among them.  For that equals should defend themselves
against equals we shall maintain to be honourable and right;
we shall make the protection of the person a matter of necessity.

That is good, he said.

Yes; and there is a further good in the law; viz.  that if a man has
a quarrel with another he will satisfy his resentment then and there,
and not proceed to more dangerous lengths.

Certainly.

To the elder shall be assigned the duty of ruling and chastising
the younger.

Clearly.

Nor can there be a doubt that the younger will not strike or do any
other violence to an elder, unless the magistrates command him;
nor will he slight him in any way.  For there are two guardians,
shame and fear, mighty to prevent him:  shame, which makes men
refrain from laying hands on those who are to them in the relation
of parents; fear, that the injured one will be succoured by the others
who are his brothers, sons, one wi fathers.

That is true, he replied.

Then in every way the laws will help the citizens to keep the peace
with one another?

Yes, there will be no want of peace.

And as the guardians will never quarrel among themselves there
will be no danger of the rest of the city being divided either
against them or against one another.

None whatever.

I hardly like even to mention the little meannesses of which they
will be rid, for they are beneath notice:  such, for example,
as the flattery of the rich by the poor, and all the pains and pangs
which men experience in bringing up a family, and in finding money
to buy necessaries for their household, borrowing and then repudiating,
getting how they can, and giving the money into the hands of women
and slaves to keep--the many evils of so many kinds which people
suffer in this way are mean enough and obvious enough, and not worth
speaking of.

Yes, he said, a man has no need of eyes in order to perceive that.

And from all these evils they will be delivered, and their life
will be blessed as the life of Olympic victors and yet more blessed.

How so?

The Olympic victor, I said, is deemed happy in receiving a part
only of the blessedness which is secured to our citizens,
who have won a more glorious victory and have a more complete
maintenance at the public cost.  For the victory which they have won
is the salvation of the whole State; and the crown with which they
and their children are crowned is the fulness of all that life needs;
they receive rewards from the hands of their country while living,
and after death have an honourable burial.

Yes, he said, and glorious rewards they are.

Do you remember, I said, how in the course of the previous discussion
some one who shall be nameless accused us of making our guardians unhappy--
they had nothing and might have possessed all things-to whom we
replied that, if an occasion offered, we might perhaps hereafter
consider this question, but that, as at present advised, we would make
our guardians truly guardians, and that we were fashioning the State
with a view to the greatest happiness, not of any particular class,
but of the whole?

Yes, I remember.

And what do you say, now that the life of our protectors is made
out to be far better and nobler than that of Olympic victors--
is the life of shoemakers, or any other artisans, or of husbandmen,
to be compared with it?

Certainly not.

At the same time I ought here to repeat what I have said elsewhere,
that if any of our guardians shall try to be happy in such a manner
that he will cease to be a guardian, and is not content with this safe
and harmonious life, which, in our judgment, is of all lives the best,
but infatuated by some youthful conceit of happiness which gets up
into his head shall seek to appropriate the whole State to himself,
then he will have to learn how wisely Hesiod spoke, when he said,
`half is more than the whole.'

If he were to consult me, I should say to him:  Stay where you are,
when you have the offer of such a life.

You agree then, I said, that men and women are to have a common way
of life such as we have described--common education, common children;
and they are to watch over the citizens in common whether abiding
in the city or going out to war; they are to keep watch together,
and to hunt together like dogs; and always and in all things,
as far as they are able, women are to share with the men? 
And in so doing they will do what is best, and will not violate,
but preserve the natural relation of the sexes.

I agree with you, he replied.

The enquiry, I said, has yet to be made, whether such a community
be found possible--as among other animals, so also among men--
and if possible, in what way possible?

You have anticipated the question which I was about to suggest.

There is no difficulty, I said, in seeing how war will be carried
on by them.

How?

Why, of course they will go on expeditions together; and will take
with them any of their children who are strong enough, that, after the
manner of the artisan's child, they may look on at the work which they
will have to do when they are grown up; and besides looking on they
will have to help and be of use in war, and to wait upon their fathers
and mothers.  Did you never observe in the arts how the potters'
boys look on and help, long before they touch the wheel?

Yes, I have.

And shall potters be more careful in educating their children
and in giving them the opportunity of seeing and practising
their duties than our guardians will be?

The idea is ridiculous, he said.

There is also the effect on the parents, with whom, as with other animals,
the presence of their young ones will be the greatest incentive to valour.

That is quite true, Socrates; and yet if they are defeated,
which may often happen in war, how great the danger is! the children
will be lost as well as their parents, and the State will never recover.

True, I said; but would you never allow them to run any risk?

I am far from saying that.

Well, but if they are ever to run a risk should they not do so on
some occasion when, if they escape disaster, they will be the better
for it?

Clearly.

Whether the future soldiers do or do not see war in the days
of their youth is a very important matter, for the sake
of which some risk may fairly be incurred.

Yes, very important.

This then must be our first step,--to make our children spectators of war;
but we must also contrive that they shall be secured against danger;
then all will be well.

True.

Their parents may be supposed not to be blind to the risks of war,
but to know, as far as human foresight can, what expeditions are safe
and what dangerous?

That may be assumed.

And they will take them on the safe expeditions and be cautious
about the dangerous ones?

True.

And they will place them under the command of experienced veterans
who will be their leaders and teachers?

Very properly.

Still, the dangers of war cannot be always foreseen; there is
a good deal of chance about them?

True.

Then against such chances the children must be at once furnished
with wings, in order that in the hour of need they may fly away
and escape.

What do you mean? he said.

I mean that we must mount them on horses in their earliest youth,
and when they have learnt to ride, take them on horseback to see war: 
the horses must be spirited and warlike, but the most tractable
and yet the swiftest that can be had.  In this way they will get
an excellent view of what is hereafter to be their own business;
and if there is danger they have only to follow their elder leaders
and escape.

I believe that you are right, he said.

Next, as to war; what are to be the relations of your soldiers
to one another and to their enemies?  I should be inclined to propose
that the soldier who leaves his rank or throws away his arms,
or is guilty of any other act of cowardice, should be degraded
into the rank of a husbandman or artisan.  What do you think?

By all means, I should say.

And he who allows himself to be taken prisoner may as well be made
a present of to his enemies; he is their lawful prey, and let them
do what they like with him.

Certainly.

But the hero who has distinguished himself, what shall be done to him? 
In the first place, he shall receive honour in the army from his
youthful comrades; every one of them in succession shall crown him. 
What do you say?

I approve.

And what do you say to his receiving the right hand of fellowship?

To that too, I agree.

But you will hardly agree to my next proposal.

What is your proposal?

That he should kiss and be kissed by them.

Most certainly, and I should be disposed to go further, and say: 
Let no one whom he has a mind to kiss refuse to be kissed by him
while the expedition lasts.  So that if there be a lover in the army,
whether his love be youth or maiden, he may be more eager to win
the prize of valour.

Capital, I said.  That the brave man is to have more wives than others has
been already determined:  and he is to have first choices in such matters
more than others, in order that he may have as many children as possible?

Agreed.

Again, there is another manner in which, according to Homer,
brave youths should be honoured; for he tells how Ajax, after he
had distinguished himself in battle, was rewarded with long chines,
which seems to be a compliment appropriate to a hero in the flower
of his age, being not only a tribute of honour but also a very
strengthening thing.

Most true, he said.

Then in this, I said, Homer shall be our teacher; and we too,
at sacrifices and on the like occasions, will honour the brave
according to the measure of their valour, whether men or women,
with hymns and those other distinctions which we were mentioning;
also with

          seats of precedence, and meats and full cups;

and in honouring them, we shall be at the same time training them.

That, he replied, is excellent.

Yes, I said; and when a man dies gloriously in war shall we not say,
in the first place, that he is of the golden race?

To be sure.

Nay, have we not the authority of Hesiod for affirming that when
they are dead

          They are holy angels upon the earth, authors of good,
          averters of evil, the guardians of speech-gifted men?

Yes; and we accept his authority.

We must learn of the god how we are to order the sepulture of divine
and heroic personages, and what is to be their special distinction
and we must do as he bids?

By all means.

And in ages to come we will reverence them and knee.  before their
sepulchres as at the graves of heroes.  And not only they but any
who are deemed pre-eminently good, whether they die from age,
or in any other way, shall be admitted to the same honours.

That is very right, he said.

Next, how shall our soldiers treat their enemies?  What about this?

In what respect do you mean?

First of all, in regard to slavery?  Do you think it right that Hellenes
should enslave Hellenic States, or allow others to enslave them,
if they can help?  Should not their custom be to spare them,
considering the danger which there is that the whole race may one
day fall under the yoke of the barbarians?

To spare them is infinitely better.

Then no Hellene should be owned by them as a slave; that is a rule
which they will observe and advise the other Hellenes to observe.

Certainly, he said; they will in this way be united against
the barbarians and will keep their hands off one another.

Next as to the slain; ought the conquerors, I said, to take anything
but their armour?  Does not the practice of despoiling an enemy afford
an excuse for not facing the battle?  Cowards skulk about the dead,
pretending that they are fulfilling a duty, and many an army
before now has been lost from this love of plunder.

Very true.

And is there not illiberality and avarice in robbing a corpse,
and also a degree of meanness and womanishness in making an enemy
of the dead body when the real enemy has flown away and left
only his fighting gear behind him,--is not this rather like a dog
who cannot get at his assailant, quarrelling with the stones
which strike him instead?

Very like a dog, he said.

Then we must abstain from spoiling the dead or hindering their burial?

Yes, he replied, we most certainly must.

Neither shall we offer up arms at the temples of the gods,
least of all the arms of Hellenes, if we care to maintain good
feeling with other Hellenes; and, indeed, we have reason to fear
that the offering of spoils taken from kinsmen may be a pollution
unless commanded by the god himself?

Very true.

Again, as to the devastation of Hellenic territory or the burning
of houses, what is to be the practice?

May I have the pleasure, he said, of hearing your opinion?

Both should be forbidden, in my judgment; I would take the annual
produce and no more.  Shall I tell you why?

Pray do.

Why, you see, there is a difference in the names `discord' and `war,'
and I imagine that there is also a difference in their natures;
the one is expressive of what is internal and domestic, the other
of what is external and foreign; and the first of the two is
termed discord, and only the second, war.

That is a very proper distinction, he replied.

And may I not observe with equal propriety that the Hellenic race
is all united together by ties of blood and friendship, and alien
and strange to the barbarians?

Very good, he said.

And therefore when Hellenes fight with barbarians and barbarians
with Hellenes, they will be described by us as being at war when
they fight, and by nature enemies, and this kind of antagonism
should be called war; but when Hellenes fight with one another we
shall say that Hellas is then in a state of disorder and discord,
they being by nature friends and such enmity is to be called discord.

I agree.

Consider then, I said, when that which we have acknowledged to be
discord occurs, and a city is divided, if both parties destroy the lands
and burn the houses of one another, how wicked does the strife appear! 
No true lover of his country would bring himself to tear in pieces
his own nurse and mother:  There might be reason in the conqueror
depriving the conquered of their harvest, but still they would
have the idea of peace in their hearts and would not mean to go
on fighting for ever.

Yes, he said, that is a better temper than the other.

And will not the city, which you are founding, be an Hellenic city?

It ought to be, he replied.

Then will not the citizens be good and civilized?

Yes, very civilized.

And will they not be lovers of Hellas, and think of Hellas as their
own land, and share in the common temples?

Most certainly.

And any difference which arises among them will be regarded by them
as discord only--a quarrel among friends, which is not to be called
a war?

Certainly not.

Then
they will quarrel as those who intend some day to be reconciled?  Certainly.

They will use friendly correction, but will not enslave or destroy
their opponents; they will be correctors, not enemies?

Just so.

And as they are Hellenes themselves they will not devastate Hellas,
nor will they burn houses, not even suppose that the whole population
of a city--men, women, and children--are equally their enemies,
for they know that the guilt of war is always confined to a few persons
and that the many are their friends.  And for all these reasons
they will be unwilling to waste their lands and raze their houses;
their enmity to them will only last until the many innocent sufferers
have compelled the guilty few to give satisfaction?

I agree, he said, that our citizens should thus deal with their
Hellenic enemies; and with barbarians as the Hellenes now deal
with one another.

Then let us enact this law also for our guardians:-that they are
neither to devastate the lands of Hellenes nor to burn their houses.

Agreed; and we may agree also in thinking that these, all our
previous enactments, are very good.

But still I must say, Socrates, that if you are allowed to go
on in this way you will entirely forget the other question
which at the commencement of this discussion you thrust aside:--
Is such an order of things possible, and how, if at all? 
For I am quite ready to acknowledge that the plan which you propose,
if only feasible, would do all sorts of good to the State. 
I will add, what you have omitted, that your citizens will be
the bravest of warriors, and will never leave their ranks, for they
will all know one another, and each will call the other father,
brother, son; and if you suppose the women to join their armies,
whether in the same rank or in the rear, either as a terror to the enemy,
or as auxiliaries in case of need, I know that they will then be
absolutely invincible; and there are many domestic tic advantages
which might also be mentioned and which I also fully acknowledge: 
but, as I admit all these advantages and as many more as you please,
if only this State of yours were to come into existence, we need
say no more about them; assuming then the existence of the State,
let us now turn to the question of possibility and ways and means--
the rest may be left.

If I loiter for a moment, you instantly make a raid upon me, I said,
and have no mercy; I have hardly escaped the first and second waves,
and you seem not to be aware that you are now bringing upon me
the third, which is the greatest and heaviest.  When you have seen
and heard the third wave, I think you be more considerate and will
acknowledge that some fear and hesitation was natural respecting
a proposal so extraordinary as that which I have now to state
and investigate.

The more appeals of this sort which you make, he said, the more
determined are we that you shall tell us how such a State is possible: 
speak out and at once.

Let me begin by reminding you that we found our way hither
in the search after justice and injustice.

True, he replied; but what of that?

I was only going to ask whether, if we have discovered them,
we are to require that the just man should in nothing fail of
absolute justice; or may we be satisfied with an approximation,
and the attainment in him of a higher degree of justice than is
to be found in other men?

The approximation will be enough.

We are enquiring into the nature of absolute justice and into the character
of the perfectly just, and into injustice and the perfectly unjust,
that we might have an ideal.  We were to look at these in order
that we might judge of our own happiness and unhappiness according
to the standard which they exhibited and the degree in which we resembled
them, but not with any view of showing that they could exist in fact.

True, he said.

Would a painter be any the worse because, after having delineated
with consummate art an ideal of a perfectly beautiful man,
he was unable to show that any such man could ever have existed?

He would be none the worse.

Well, and were we not creating an ideal of a perfect State?

To be sure.

And is our theory a worse theory because we are unable to prove
the possibility of a city being ordered in the manner described?

Surely not, he replied.

That is the truth, I said.  But if, at your request, I am to try
and show how and under what conditions the possibility is highest,
I must ask you, having this in view, to repeat your former admissions.

What admissions?

I want to know whether ideals are ever fully realised in language? 
Does not the word express more than the fact, and must not the actual,
whatever a man may think, always, in the nature of things, fall short
of the truth?  What do you say?

I agree.

Then you must not insist on my proving that the actual State will
in every respect coincide with the ideal:  if we are only able
to discover how a city may be governed nearly as we proposed,
you will admit that we have discovered the possibility which you demand;
and will be contented.  I am sure that I should be contented--
will not you?

Yes, I will.

Let me next endeavour to show what is that fault in States which is
the cause of their present maladministration, and what is the least
change which will enable a State to pass into the truer form;
and let the change, if possible, be of one thing only, or if not, of two;
at any rate, let the changes be as few and slight as possible.

Certainly, he replied.

I think, I said, that there might be a reform of the State if only
one change were made, which is not a slight or easy though still
a possible one.

What is it? he said.

Now then, I said, I go to meet that which I liken to the greatest
of the waves; yet shall the word be spoken, even though the wave
break and drown me in laughter and dishonour; and do you mark my words.

Proceed.

I said:  Until philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes
of this world have the spirit and power of philosophy, and political
greatness and wisdom meet in one, and those commoner natures
who pursue either to the exclusion of the other are compelled
to stand aside, cities will never have rest from their evils,--
nor the human race, as I believe,--and then only will this our
State have a possibility of life and behold the light of day. 
Such was the thought, my dear Glaucon, which I would fain have
uttered if it had not seemed too extravagant; for to be convinced
that in no other State can there be happiness private or public is
indeed a hard thing.

Socrates, what do you mean?  I would have you consider that
the word which you have uttered is one at which numerous persons,
and very respectable persons too, in a figure pulling off their
coats all in a moment, and seizing any weapon that comes to hand,
will run at you might and main, before you know where you are,
intending to do heaven knows what; and if you don't prepare an answer,
and put yourself in motion, you will be prepared by their fine wits,'
and no mistake.

You got me into the scrape, I said.

And I was quite right; however, I will do all I can to get you out of it;
but I can only give you good-will and good advice, and, perhaps,
I may be able to fit answers to your questions better than another--
that is all.  And now, having such an auxiliary, you must do your best
to show the unbelievers that you are right.

I ought to try, I said, since you offer me such invaluable assistance. 
And I think that, if there is to be a chance of our escaping,
we must explain to them whom we mean when we say that philosophers
are to rule in the State; then we shall be able to defend ourselves: 
There will be discovered to be some natures who ought to study
philosophy and to be leaders in the State; and others who are not
born to be philosophers, and are meant to be followers rather
than leaders.

Then now for a definition, he said.

Follow me, I said, and I hope that I may in some way or other
be able to give you a satisfactory explanation.

Proceed.

I dare say that you remember, and therefore I need not remind you,
that a lover, if lie is worthy of the name, ought to show his love,
not to some one part of that which he loves, but to the whole.

I really do not understand, and therefore beg of you to assist
my memory.

Another person, I said, might fairly reply as you do; but a man
of pleasure like yourself ought to know that all who are in the flower
of youth do somehow or other raise a pang or emotion in a lover's breast,
and are thought by him to be worthy of his affectionate regards. 
Is not this a way which you have with the fair:  one has a snub nose,
and you praise his charming face; the hook-nose of another has,
you say, a royal look; while he who is neither snub nor hooked
has the grace of regularity:  the dark visage is manly, the fair
are children of the gods; and as to the sweet `honey pale,'
as they are called, what is the very name but the invention of a
lover who talks in diminutives, and is not adverse to paleness
if appearing on the cheek of youth?  In a word, there is no excuse
which you will not make, and nothing which you will not say,
in order not to lose a single flower that blooms in the spring-time
of youth.

If you make me an authority in matters of love, for the sake
of the argument, I assent.

And what do you say of lovers of wine?  Do you not see them doing
the same?  They are glad of any pretext of drinking any wine.

Very good.

And the same is true of ambitious men; if they cannot command an army,
they are willing to command a file; and if they cannot be honoured
by really great and important persons, they are glad to be honoured
by lesser and meaner people, but honour of some kind they must have.

Exactly.

Once more let me ask:  Does he who desires any class of goods,
desire the whole class or a part only?

The whole.

And may we not say of the philosopher that he is a lover,
not of a part of wisdom only, but of the whole?

Yes, of the whole.

And he who dislikes learnings, especially in youth, when he has
no power of judging what is good and what is not, such an one
we maintain not to be a philosopher or a lover of knowledge,
just as he who refuses his food is not hungry, and may be said
to have a bad appetite and not a good one?

Very true, he said.

Whereas he who has a taste for every sort of knowledge and who is curious
to learn and is never satisfied, may be justly termed a philosopher? 
Am I not right?

Glaucon said:  If curiosity makes a philosopher, you will find
many a strange being will have a title to the name.  All the lovers
of sights have a delight in learning, and must therefore be included. 
Musical amateurs, too, are a folk strangely out of place among
philosophers, for they are the last persons in the world who would
come to anything like a philosophical discussion, if they could help,
while they run about at the Dionysiac festivals as if they had
let out their ears to hear every chorus; whether the performance
is in town or country--that makes no difference--they are there. 
Now are we to maintain that all these and any who have similar tastes,
as well as the professors of quite minor arts, are philosophers?

Certainly not, I replied; they are only an imitation.

He said:  Who then are the true philosophers?

Those, I said, who are lovers of the vision of truth.

That is also good, he said; but I should like to know what you mean?

To another, I replied, I might have a difficulty in explaining;
but I am sure that you will admit a proposition which I am about
to make.

What is the proposition?

That since beauty is the opposite of ugliness, they are two?

Certainly.

And inasmuch as they are two, each of them is one?

True again.

And of just and unjust, good and evil, and of every other class,
the same remark holds:  taken singly, each of them one; but from
the various combinations of them with actions and things and with
one another, they are seen in all sorts of lights and appear many? 
Very true.

And this is the distinction which I draw between the sight-loving,
art-loving, practical class and those of whom I am speaking,
and who are alone worthy of the name of philosophers.

How do you distinguish them? he said.

The lovers of sounds and sights, I replied, are, as I conceive,
fond of fine tones and colours and forms and all the artificial
products that are made out of them, but their mind is incapable
of seeing or loving absolute beauty.

True, he replied.

Few are they who are able to attain to the sight of this.

Very true.

And he who, having a sense of beautiful things has no sense
of absolute beauty, or who, if another lead him to a knowledge
of that beauty is unable to follow--of such an one I ask,
Is he awake or in a dream only?  Reflect:  is not the dreamer,
sleeping or waking, one who likens dissimilar things, who puts
the copy in the place of the real object?

I should certainly say that such an one was dreaming.

But take the case of the other, who recognises the existence
of absolute beauty and is able to distinguish the idea from the
objects which participate in the idea, neither putting the objects
in the place of the idea nor the idea in the place of the objects--
is he a dreamer, or is he awake?

He is wide awake.

And may we not say that the mind of the one who knows has knowledge,
and that the mind of the other, who opines only, has opinion

Certainly.

But suppose that the latter should quarrel with us and dispute
our statement, can we administer any soothing cordial or advice to him,
without revealing to him that there is sad disorder in his wits?

We must certainly offer him some good advice, he replied.

Come, then, and let us think of something to say to him.  Shall we begin
by assuring him that he is welcome to any knowledge which he may have,
and that we are rejoiced at his having it?  But we should like to ask
him a question:  Does he who has knowledge know something or nothing? 
(You must answer for him.)

I answer that he knows something.

Something that is or is not?

Something that is; for how can that which is not ever be known?

And are we assured, after looking at the matter from many points
of view, that absolute being is or may be absolutely known,
but that the utterly non-existent is utterly unknown?

Nothing can be more certain.

Good.  But if there be anything which is of such a nature as to be
and not to be, that will have a place intermediate between pure
being and the absolute negation of being?

Yes, between them.

And, as knowledge corresponded to being and ignorance of necessity
to not-being, for that intermediate between being and not-being
there has to be discovered a corresponding intermediate between
ignorance and knowledge, if there be such?

Certainly.

Do we admit the existence of opinion?

Undoubtedly.

As being the same with knowledge, or another faculty?

Another faculty.

Then opinion and knowledge have to do with different kinds of matter
corresponding to this difference of faculties?

Yes.

And knowledge is relative to being and knows being.  But before I
proceed further I will make a division.

What division?

I will begin by placing faculties in a class by themselves: 
they are powers in us, and in all other things, by which we do as we do. 
Sight and hearing, for example, I should call faculties.  Have I
clearly explained the class which I mean?

Yes, I quite understand.

Then let me tell you my view about them.  I do not see them,
and therefore the distinctions of fire, colour, and the like, which enable
me to discern the differences of some things, do not apply to them. 
In speaking of a faculty I think only of its sphere and its result;
and that which has the same sphere and the same result I call
the same faculty, but that which has another sphere and another
result I call different.  Would that be your way of speaking?

Yes.

And will you be so very good as to answer one more question? 
Would you say that knowledge is a faculty, or in what class would you
place it?

Certainly knowledge is a faculty, and the mightiest of all faculties.

And is opinion also a faculty?

Certainly, he said; for opinion is that with which we are able
to form an opinion.

And yet you were acknowledging a little while ago that knowledge
is not the same as opinion?

Why, yes, he said:  how can any reasonable being ever identify
that which is infallible with that which errs?

An excellent answer, proving, I said, that we are quite conscious
of a distinction between them.

Yes.

Then knowledge and opinion having distinct powers have also distinct
spheres or subject-matters?

That is certain.

Being is the sphere or subject-matter of knowledge, and knowledge
is to know the nature of being?

Yes.

And opinion is to have an opinion?

Yes.

And do we know what we opine? or is the subject-matter of opinion
the same as the subject-matter of knowledge?

Nay, he replied, that has been already disproven; if difference
in faculty implies difference in the sphere or subject matter, and if,
as we were saying, opinion and knowledge are distinct faculties,
then the sphere of knowledge and of opinion cannot be the same.

Then if being is the subject-matter of knowledge, something else
must be the subject-matter of opinion?

Yes, something else.

Well then, is not-being the subject-matter of opinion? or, rather,
how can there be an opinion at all about not-being? Reflect: 
when a man has an opinion, has he not an opinion about something? 
Can he have an opinion which is an opinion about nothing?

Impossible.

He who has an opinion has an opinion about some one thing?

Yes.

And not-being is not one thing but, properly speaking, nothing?

True.

Of not-being, ignorance was assumed to be the necessary correlative;
of being, knowledge?

True, he said.

Then opinion is not concerned either with being or with not-being?

Not with either.

And can therefore neither be ignorance nor knowledge?

That seems to be true.

But is opinion to be sought without and beyond either of them,
in a greater clearness than knowledge, or in a greater darkness
than ignorance?

In neither.

Then I suppose that opinion appears to you to be darker than knowledge,
but lighter than ignorance?

Both; and in no small degree.

And also to be within and between them?

Yes.

Then you would infer that opinion is intermediate?

No question.

But were we not saying before, that if anything appeared to be of a sort
which is and is not at the same time, that sort of thing would appear
also to lie in the interval between pure being and absolute not-being;
and that the corresponding faculty is neither knowledge nor ignorance,
but will be found in the interval between them?

True.

And in that interval there has now been discovered something
which we call opinion?

There has.

Then what remains to be discovered is the object which partakes
equally of the nature of being and not-being, and cannot rightly be
termed either, pure and simple; this unknown term, when discovered,
we may truly call the subject of opinion, and assign each to its
proper faculty, -the extremes to the faculties of the extremes
and the mean to the faculty of the mean.

True.

This being premised, I would ask the gentleman who is of opinion
that there is no absolute or unchangeable idea of beauty--
in whose opinion the beautiful is the manifold--he, I say,
your lover of beautiful sights, who cannot bear to be told that
the beautiful is one, and the just is one, or that anything is one--
to him I would appeal, saying, Will you be so very kind, sir, as to tell
us whether, of all these beautiful things, there is one which will
not be found ugly; or of the just, which will not be found unjust;
or of the holy, which will not also be unholy?

No, he replied; the beautiful will in some point of view be found ugly;
and the same is true of the rest.

And may not the many which are doubles be also halves?--doubles, that is,
of one thing, and halves of another?

Quite true.

And things great and small, heavy and light, as they are termed,
will not be denoted by these any more than by the opposite names?

True; both these and the opposite names will always attach to all
of them.

And can any one of those many things which are called by particular
names be said to be this rather than not to be this?

He replied:  They are like the punning riddles which are asked
at feasts or the children's puzzle about the eunuch aiming
at the bat, with what he hit him, as they say in the puzzle,
and upon what the bat was sitting.  The individual objects of
which I am speaking are also a riddle, and have a double sense: 
nor can you fix them in your mind, either as being or not-being,
or both, or neither.

Then what will you do with them?  I said.  Can they have a better
place than between being and not-being? For they are clearly
not in greater darkness or negation than not-being, or more full
of light and existence than being.

That is quite true, he said.

Thus then we seem to have discovered that the many ideas which the multitude
entertain about the beautiful and about all other things are tossing
about in some region which is halfway between pure being and pure not-being?

We have.

Yes; and we had before agreed that anything of this kind which we
might find was to be described as matter of opinion, and not as
matter of knowledge; being the intermediate flux which is caught
and detained by the intermediate faculty.

Quite true.

Then those who see the many beautiful, and who yet neither see
absolute beauty, nor can follow any guide who points the way thither;
who see the many just, and not absolute justice, and the like,--
such persons may be said to have opinion but not knowledge?

That is certain.

But those who see the absolute and eternal and immutable may be said
to know, and not to have opinion only?

Neither can that be denied.

The one loves and embraces the subjects of knowledge, the other those
of opinion?  The latter are the same, as I dare say will remember,
who listened to sweet sounds and gazed upon fair colours, but would
not tolerate the existence of absolute beauty.

Yes, I remember.

Shall we then be guilty of any impropriety in calling them lovers
of opinion rather than lovers of wisdom, and will they be very angry
with us for thus describing them?

I shall tell them not to be angry; no man should be angry at what is true.

But those who love the truth in each thing are to be called lovers
of wisdom and not lovers of opinion.

Assuredly.

BOOK VI

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

AND thus, Glaucon, after the argument has gone a weary way,
the true and the false philosophers have at length appeared in view.

I do not think, he said, that the way could have been shortened.

I suppose not, I said; and yet I believe that we might have had
a better view of both of them if the discussion could have been
confined to this one subject and if there were not many other
questions awaiting us, which he who desires to see in what respect
the life of the just differs from that of the unjust must consider.

And what is the next question? he asked.

Surely, I said, the one which follows next in order.  Inasmuch as
philosophers only are able to grasp the eternal and unchangeable,
and those who wander in the region of the many and variable
are not philosophers, I must ask you which of the two classes
should be the rulers of our State?

And how can we rightly answer that question?

Whichever of the two are best able to guard the laws and institutions
of our State--let them be our guardians.

Very good.

Neither, I said, can there be any question that the guardian
who is to keep anything should have eyes rather than no eyes?

There can be no question of that.

And are not those who are verily and indeed wanting in the knowledge
of the true being of each thing, and who have in their souls
no clear pattern, and are unable as with a painter's eye
to look at the absolute truth and to that original to repair,
and having perfect vision of the other world to order the laws
about beauty, goodness, justice in this, if not already ordered,
and to guard and preserve the order of them--are not such persons,
I ask, simply blind?

Truly, he replied, they are much in that condition.

And shall they be our guardians when there are others who,
besides being their equals in experience and falling short of them
in no particular of virtue, also know the very truth of each thing?

There can be no reason, he said, for rejecting those who have this
greatest of all great qualities; they must always have the first
place unless they fail in some other respect.

Suppose then, I said, that we determine how far they can unite this
and the other excellences.

By all means.

In the first place, as we began by observing, the nature of the
philosopher has to be ascertained.  We must come to an understanding
about him, and, when we have done so, then, if I am not mistaken,
we shall also acknowledge that such an union of qualities is possible,
and that those in whom they are united, and those only, should be
rulers in the State.

What do you mean?

Let us suppose that philosophical minds always love knowledge
of a sort which shows them the eternal nature not varying from
generation and corruption.

Agreed.

And further, I said, let us agree that they are lovers of all true being;
there is no part whether greater or less, or more or less honourable,
which they are willing to renounce; as we said before of the lover
and the man of ambition.

True.

And if they are to be what we were describing, is there not another
quality which they should also possess?

What quality?

Truthfulness:  they will never intentionally receive into their
mind falsehood, which is their detestation, and they will love
the truth.

Yes, that may be safely affirmed of them.

`May be,' my friend, I replied, is not the word; say rather `must
be affirmed:'  for he whose nature is amorous of anything cannot help
loving all that belongs or is akin to the object of his affections.

Right, he said.

And is there anything more akin to wisdom than truth?

How can there be?

Can the same nature be a lover of wisdom and a lover of falsehood?

Never.

The true lover of learning then must from his earliest youth,
as far as in him lies, desire all truth?

Assuredly.

But then again, as we know by experience, he whose desires are
strong in one direction will have them weaker in others; they will
be like a stream which has been drawn off into another channel.

True.

He whose desires are drawn towards knowledge in every form will be absorbed
in the pleasures of the soul, and will hardly feel bodily pleasure--
I mean, if he be a true philosopher and not a sham one.

That is most certain.

Such an one is sure to be temperate and the reverse of covetous;
for the motives which make another man desirous of having and spending,
have no place in his character.

Very true.

Another criterion of the philosophical nature has also to be considered.

What is that?

There should be no secret corner of illiberality; nothing can
more antagonistic than meanness to a soul which is ever longing
after the whole of things both divine and human.

Most true, he replied.

Then how can he who has magnificence of mind and is the spectator
of all time and all existence, think much of human life?

He cannot.

Or can such an one account death fearful?

No indeed.

Then the cowardly and mean nature has no part in true philosophy?

Certainly not.

Or again:  can he who is harmoniously constituted, who is not
covetous or mean, or a boaster, or a coward-can he, I say,
ever be unjust or hard in his dealings?

Impossible.

Then you will soon observe whether a man is just and gentle,
or rude and unsociable; these are the signs which distinguish even
in youth the philosophical nature from the unphilosophical.

True.

There is another point which should be remarked.

What point?

Whether he has or has not a pleasure in learning; for no one will
love that which gives him pain, and in which after much toil he
makes little progress.

Certainly not.

And again, if he is forgetful and retains nothing of what he learns,
will he not be an empty vessel?

That is certain.

Labouring in vain, he must end in hating himself and his
fruitless occupation?  Yes.

Then a soul which forgets cannot be ranked among genuine philosophic natures;
we must insist that the philosopher should have a good memory?

Certainly.

And once more, the inharmonious and unseemly nature can only tend
to disproportion?

Undoubtedly.

And do you consider truth to be akin to proportion or to disproportion?

To proportion.

Then, besides other qualities, we must try to find a naturally
well-proportioned and gracious mind, which will move spontaneously
towards the true being of everything.

Certainly.

Well, and do not all these qualities, which we have been enumerating,
go together, and are they not, in a manner, necessary to a soul,
which is to have a full and perfect participation of being?

They are absolutely necessary, he replied.

And must not that be a blameless study which he only can pursue who has
the gift of a good memory, and is quick to learn,--noble, gracious,
the friend of truth, justice, courage, temperance, who are his kindred?

The god of jealousy himself, he said, could find no fault with such
a study.

And to men like him, I said, when perfected by years and education,
and to these only you will entrust the State.

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS

Here Adeimantus interposed and said:  To these statements,
Socrates, no one can offer a reply; but when you talk in this way,
a strange feeling passes over the minds of your hearers:  They fancy
that they are led astray a little at each step in the argument,
owing to their own want of skill in asking and answering questions;
these littles accumulate, and at the end of the discussion they
are found to have sustained a mighty overthrow and all their former
notions appear to be turned upside down.  And as unskilful players
of draughts are at last shut up by their more skilful adversaries
and have no piece to move, so they too find themselves shut up at last;
for they have nothing to say in this new game of which words
are the counters; and yet all the time they are in the right. 
The observation is suggested to me by what is now occurring. 
For any one of us might say, that although in words he is not
able to meet you at each step of the argument, he sees as a fact
that the votaries of philosophy, when they carry on the study,
not only in youth as a part of education, but as the pursuit
of their maturer years, most of them become strange monsters,
not to say utter rogues, and that those who may be considered the best
of them are made useless to the world by the very study which
you extol.

Well, and do you think that those who say so are wrong?

I cannot tell, he replied; but I should like to know what is
your opinion.

Hear my answer; I am of opinion that they are quite right.

Then how can you be justified in saying that cities will not cease
from evil until philosophers rule in them, when philosophers
are acknowledged by us to be of no use to them?

You ask a question, I said, to which a reply can only be given
in a parable.

Yes, Socrates; and that is a way of speaking to which you are not
at all accustomed, I suppose.

I perceive, I said, that you are vastly amused at having plunged me
into such a hopeless discussion; but now hear the parable, and then
you will be still more amused at the meagreness of my imagination: 
for the manner in which the best men are treated in their own States
is so grievous that no single thing on earth is comparable to it;
and therefore, if I am to plead their cause, I must have recourse
to fiction, and put together a figure made up of many things,
like the fabulous unions of goats and stags which are found
in pictures.  Imagine then a fleet or a ship in which there
is a captain who is taller and stronger than any of the crew,
but he is a little deaf and has a similar infirmity in sight,
and his knowledge of navigation is not much better. 
The sailors are quarrelling with one another about the steering--
every one is of opinion that he has a right to steer, though he has
never learned the art of navigation and cannot tell who taught him
or when he learned, and will further assert that it cannot be taught,
and they are ready to cut in pieces any one who says the contrary. 
They throng about the captain, begging and praying him to commit
the helm to them; and if at any time they do not prevail, but others
are preferred to them, they kill the others or throw them overboard,
and having first chained up the noble captain's senses with drink
or some narcotic drug, they mutiny and take possession of the ship
and make free with the stores; thus, eating and drinking, they proceed
on their voyage in such a manner as might be expected of them. 
Him who is their partisan and cleverly aids them in their plot
for getting the ship out of the captain's hands into their own
whether by force or persuasion, they compliment with the name
of sailor, pilot, able seaman, and abuse the other sort of man,
whom they call a good-for-nothing; but that the true pilot must
pay attention to the year and seasons and sky and stars and winds,
and whatever else belongs to his art, if he intends to be really
qualified for the command of a ship, and that he must and will
be the steerer, whether other people like or not-the possibility
of this union of authority with the steerer's art has never seriously
entered into their thoughts or been made part of their calling. 
Now in vessels which are in a state of mutiny and by sailors
who are mutineers, how will the true pilot be regarded? 
Will he not be called by them a prater, a star-gazer, a
good-for-nothing?

Of course, said Adeimantus.

Then you will hardly need, I said, to hear the interpretation of the figure,
which describes the true philosopher in his relation to the State;
for you understand already.

Certainly.

Then suppose you now take this parable to the gentleman who is
surprised at finding that philosophers have no honour in their cities;
explain it to him and try to convince him that their having honour
would be far more extraordinary.

I will.

Say to him, that, in deeming the best votaries of philosophy to be
useless to the rest of the world, he is right; but also tell him
to attribute their uselessness to the fault of those who will not
use them, and not to themselves.  The pilot should not humbly beg
the sailors to be commanded by him--that is not the order of nature;
neither are `the wise to go to the doors of the rich'--the ingenious
author of this saying told a lie--but the truth is, that, when a man
is ill, whether he be rich or poor, to the physician he must go,
and he who wants to be governed, to him who is able to govern. 
The ruler who is good for anything ought not to beg his subjects
to be ruled by him; although the present governors of mankind are of a
different stamp; they may be justly compared to the mutinous sailors,
and the true helmsmen to those who are called by them good-for-nothings
and star-gazers.

Precisely so, he said.

For these reasons, and among men like these, philosophy, the noblest
pursuit of all, is not likely to be much esteemed by those of
the opposite faction; not that the greatest and most lasting injury
is done to her by her opponents, but by her own professing followers,
the same of whom you suppose the accuser to say, that the greater
number of them are arrant rogues, and the best are useless;
in which opinion I agreed.

Yes.

And the reason why the good are useless has now been explained?

True.

Then shall we proceed to show that the corruption of the majority
is also unavoidable, and that this is not to be laid to the charge
of philosophy any more than the other?

By all means.

And let us ask and answer in turn, first going back to the description
of the gentle and noble nature.  Truth, as you will remember,
was his leader, whom he followed always and in all things;
failing in this, he was an impostor, and had no part or lot
in true philosophy.

Yes, that was said.

Well, and is not this one quality, to mention no others,
greatly at variance with present notions of him?

Certainly, he said.

And have we not a right to say in his defence, that the true lover
of knowledge is always striving after being--that is his nature;
he will not rest in the multiplicity of individuals which is an
appearance only, but will go on--the keen edge will not be blunted,
nor the force of his desire abate until he have attained the knowledge
of the true nature of every essence by a sympathetic and kindred
power in the soul, and by that power drawing near and mingling and
becoming incorporate with very being, having begotten mind and truth,
he will have knowledge and will live and grow truly, and then,
and not till then, will he cease from his travail.

Nothing, he said, can be more just than such a description of him.

And will the love of a lie be any part of a philosopher's nature? 
Will he not utterly hate a lie?

He will.

And when truth is the captain, we cannot suspect any evil of the band
which he leads?

Impossible.

Justice and health of mind will be of the company, and temperance
will follow after?

True, he replied.

Neither is there any reason why I should again set in array
the philosopher's virtues, as you will doubtless remember
that courage, magnificence, apprehension, memory, were his
natural gifts.  And you objected that, although no one could deny
what I then said, still, if you leave words and look at facts,
the persons who are thus described are some of them manifestly useless,
and the greater number utterly depraved; we were then led to enquire
into the grounds of these accusations, and have now arrived at the point
of asking why are the majority bad, which question of necessity
brought us back to the examination and definition of the true philosopher.

Exactly.

And we have next to consider the corruptions of the philosophic nature,
why so many are spoiled and so few escape spoiling--I am speaking
of those who were said to be useless but not wicked--and, when we
have done with them, we will speak of the imitators of philosophy,
what manner of men are they who aspire after a profession
which is above them and of which they are unworthy, and then,
by their manifold inconsistencies, bring upon philosophy, and upon
all philosophers, that universal reprobation of which we speak.

What are these corruptions? he said.

I will see if I can explain them to you.  Every one will admit that
a nature having in perfection all the qualities which we required
in a philosopher, is a rare plant which is seldom seen among men.

Rare indeed.

And what numberless and powerful causes tend to destroy these
rare natures!

What causes?

In the first place there are their own virtues, their courage, temperance,
and the rest of them, every one of which praise worthy qualities
(and this is a most singular circumstance) destroys and distracts
from philosophy the soul which is the possessor of them.

That is very singular, he replied.

Then there are all the ordinary goods of life--beauty, wealth,
strength, rank, and great connections in the State--you understand
the sort of things--these also have a corrupting and distracting effect.

I understand; but I should like to know more precisely what you
mean about them.

Grasp the truth as a whole, I said, and in the right way; you will
then have no difficulty in apprehending the preceding remarks,
and they will no longer appear strange to you.

And how am I to do so? he asked.

Why, I said, we know that all germs or seeds, whether vegetable
or animal, when they fail to meet with proper nutriment or climate
or soil, in proportion to their vigour, are all the more sensitive
to the want of a suitable environment, for evil is a greater enemy
to what is good than what is not.

Very true.

There is reason in supposing that the finest natures, when under
alien conditions, receive more injury than the inferior,
because the contrast is greater.

Certainly.

And may we not say, Adeimantus, that the most gifted minds,
when they are ill-educated, become pre-eminently bad?  Do not
great crimes and the spirit of pure evil spring out of a fulness
of nature ruined by education rather than from any inferiority,
whereas weak natures are scarcely capable of any very great good
or very great evil?

There I think that you are right.

And our philosopher follows the same analogy-he is like a plant which,
having proper nurture, must necessarily grow and mature
into all virtue, but, if sown and planted in an alien soil,
becomes the most noxious of all weeds, unless he be preserved
by some divine power.  Do you really think, as people so often say,
that our youth are corrupted by Sophists, or that private teachers
of the art corrupt them in any degree worth speaking of? 
Are not the public who say these things the greatest of all Sophists? 
And do they not educate to perfection young and old, men and women alike,
and fashion them after their own hearts?

When is this accomplished? he said.

When they meet together, and the world sits down at an assembly,
or in a court of law, or a theatre, or a camp, or in any other
popular resort, and there is a great uproar, and they praise
some things which are being said or done, and blame other things,
equally exaggerating both, shouting and clapping their hands,
and the echo of the rocks and the place in which they are assembled
redoubles the sound of the praise or blame--at such a time will not
a young man's heart, as they say, leap within him?  Will any private
training enable him to stand firm against the overwhelming flood
of popular opinion? or will he be carried away by the stream? 
Will he not have the notions of good and evil which the public
in general have--he will do as they do, and as they are, such will
he be?

Yes, Socrates; necessity will compel him.

And yet, I said, there is a still greater necessity, which has
not been mentioned.

What is that?

The gentle force of attainder or confiscation or death which,
as you are aware, these new Sophists and educators who are the public,
apply when their words are powerless.

Indeed they do; and in right good earnest.

Now what opinion of any other Sophist, or of any private person,
can be expected to overcome in such an unequal contest?

None, he replied.

No, indeed, I said, even to make the attempt is a great piece
of folly; there neither is, nor has been, nor is ever likely to be,
any different type of character which has had no other training
in virtue but that which is supplied by public opinion--I speak,
my friend, of human virtue only; what is more than human,
as the proverb says, is not included:  for I would not have
you ignorant that, in the present evil state of governments,
whatever is saved and comes to good is saved by the power of God,
as we may truly say.

I quite assent, he replied.

Then let me crave your assent also to a further observation.

What are you going to say?

Why, that all those mercenary individuals, whom the many call
Sophists and whom they deem to be their adversaries, do, in fact,
teach nothing but the opinion of the many, that is to say, the opinions
of their assemblies; and this is their wisdom.  I might compare them
to a man who should study the tempers and desires of a mighty strong
beast who is fed by him-he would learn how to approach and handle him,
also at what times and from what causes he is dangerous or the reverse,
and what is the meaning of his several cries, and by what sounds,
when another utters them, he is soothed or infuriated; and you
may suppose further, that when, by continually attending upon him,
he has become perfect in all this, he calls his knowledge wisdom,
and makes of it a system or art, which he proceeds to teach,
although he has no real notion of what he means by the principles
or passions of which he is speaking, but calls this honourable
and that dishonourable, or good or evil, or just or unjust,
all in accordance with the tastes and tempers of the great brute. 
Good he pronounces to be that in which the beast delights and evil to be
that which he dislikes; and he can give no other account of them except
that the just and noble are the necessary, having never himself seen,
and having no power of explaining to others the nature of either,
or the difference between them, which is immense.  By heaven,
would not such an one be a rare educator?

Indeed, he would.

And in what way does he who thinks that wisdom is the discernment
of the tempers and tastes of the motley multitude, whether in painting
or music, or, finally, in politics, differ from him whom I have been
describing?  For when a man consorts with the many, and exhibits
to them his poem or other work of art or the service which he has
done the State, making them his judges when he is not obliged,
the so-called necessity of Diomede will oblige him to produce whatever
they praise.  And yet the reasons are utterly ludicrous which they give
in confirmation of their own notions about the honourable and good. 
Did you ever hear any of them which were not?

No, nor am I likely to hear.

You recognise the truth of what I have been saying?  Then let me ask you
to consider further whether the world will ever be induced to believe
in the existence of absolute beauty rather than of the many beautiful,
or of the absolute in each kind rather than of the many in each kind?

Certainly not.

Then the world cannot possibly be a philosopher?

Impossible.

And therefore philosophers must inevitably fall under the censure
of the world?

They must.

And of individuals who consort with the mob and seek to please them?

That is evident.

Then, do you see any way in which the philosopher can be preserved
in his calling to the end? and remember what we were saying of him,
that he was to have quickness and memory and courage and magnificence--
these were admitted by us to be the true philosopher's gifts.

Yes.

Will not such an one from his early childhood be in all things
first among all, especially if his bodily endowments are like his
mental ones?

Certainly, he said.

And his friends and fellow-citizens will want to use him as he gets
older for their own purposes?

No question.

Falling at his feet, they will make requests to him and do him honour
and flatter him, because they want to get into their hands now,
the power which he will one day possess.

That often happens, he said.

And what will a man such as he be likely to do under such circumstances,
especially if he be a citizen of a great city, rich and noble,
and a tall proper youth?  Will he not be full of boundless aspirations,
and fancy himself able to manage the affairs of Hellenes and of barbarians,
and having got such notions into his head will he not dilate
and elevate himself in the fulness of vain pomp and senseless pride?

To be sure he will.

Now, when he is in this state of mind, if some one gently comes
to him and tells him that he is a fool and must get understanding,
which can only be got by slaving for it, do you think that,
under such adverse circumstances, he will be easily induced
to listen?

Far otherwise.

And even if there be some one who through inherent goodness
or natural reasonableness has had his eyes opened a little and is
humbled and taken captive by philosophy, how will his friends
behave when they think that they are likely to lose the advantage
which they were hoping to reap from his companionship? 
Will they not do and say anything to prevent him from yielding
to his better nature and to render his teacher powerless,
using to this end private intrigues as well as public prosecutions?

There can be no doubt of it.

And how can one who is thus circumstanced ever become a philosopher?

Impossible.

Then were we not right in saying that even the very qualities
which make a man a philosopher may, if he be ill-educated, divert
him from philosophy, no less than riches and their accompaniments
and the other so-called goods of life?

We were quite right.

Thus, my excellent friend, is brought about all that ruin and failure
which I have been describing of the natures best adapted to the best
of all pursuits; they are natures which we maintain to be rare at any time;
this being the class out of which come the men who are the authors
of the greatest evil to States and individuals; and also of the greatest
good when the tide carries them in that direction; but a small
man never was the doer of any great thing either to individuals or to States.

That is most true, he said.

And so philosophy is left desolate, with her marriage rite incomplete: 
for her own have fallen away and forsaken her, and while they
are leading a false and unbecoming life, other unworthy persons,
seeing that she has no kinsmen to be her protectors, enter in
and dishonour her; and fasten upon her the reproaches which,
as you say, her reprovers utter, who affirm of her votaries that
some are good for nothing, and that the greater number deserve
the severest punishment.

That is certainly what people say.

Yes; and what else would you expect, I said, when you think of the puny
creatures who, seeing this land open to them--a land well stocked
with fair names and showy titles--like prisoners running out of prison
into a sanctuary, take a leap out of their trades into philosophy;
those who do so being probably the cleverest hands at their own
miserable crafts?  For, although philosophy be in this evil case,
still there remains a dignity about her which is not to be found
in the arts.  And many are thus attracted by her whose natures
are imperfect and whose souls are maimed and disfigured by
their meannesses, as their bodies are by their trades and crafts. 
Is not this unavoidable?

Yes.

Are they not exactly like a bald little tinker who has just got
out of durance and come into a fortune; he takes a bath and puts
on a new coat, and is decked out as a bridegroom going to marry
his master's daughter, who is left poor and desolate?

A most exact parallel.

What will be the issue of such marriages?  Will they not be vile
and bastard?

There can be no question of it.

And when persons who are unworthy of education approach philosophy
and make an alliance with her who is a rank above them what sort
of ideas and opinions are likely to be generated?  Will they not be
sophisms captivating to the ear, having nothing in them genuine,
or worthy of or akin to true wisdom?

No doubt, he said.

Then, Adeimantus, I said, the worthy disciples of philosophy will be
but a small remnant:  perchance some noble and well-educated person,
detained by exile in her service, who in the absence of corrupting
influences remains devoted to her; or some lofty soul born
in a mean city, the politics of which he contemns and neglects;
and there may be a gifted few who leave the arts, which they
justly despise, and come to her;--or peradventure there are some
who are restrained by our friend Theages' bridle; for everything
in the life of Theages conspired to divert him from philosophy;
but ill-health kept him away from politics.  My own case of
the internal sign is hardly worth mentioning, for rarely, if ever,
has such a monitor been given to any other man.  Those who belong
to this small class have tasted how sweet and blessed a possession
philosophy is, and have also seen enough of the madness of the multitude;
and they know that no politician is honest, nor is there any
champion of justice at whose side they may fight and be saved. 
Such an one may be compared to a man who has fallen among wild beasts--
he will not join in the wickedness of his fellows, but neither
is he able singly to resist all their fierce natures, and therefore
seeing that he would be of no use to the State or to his friends,
and reflecting that he would have to throw away his life without
doing any good either to himself or others, he holds his peace,
and goes his own way.  He is like one who, in the storm of dust and
sleet which the driving wind hurries along, retires under the shelter
of a wall; and seeing the rest of mankind full of wickedness,
he is content, if only he can live his own life and be pure from
evil or unrighteousness, and depart in peace and good-will, with
bright hopes.

Yes, he said, and he will have done a great work before he departs.

A great work--yes; but not the greatest, unless he find a State
suitable to him; for in a State which is suitable to him,
he will have a larger growth and be the saviour of his country,
as well as of himself.

The causes why philosophy is in such an evil name have now been
sufficiently explained:  the injustice of the charges against
her has been shown-is there anything more which you wish to say?

Nothing more on that subject, he replied; but I should like to know
which of the governments now existing is in your opinion the one
adapted to her.

Not any of them, I said; and that is precisely the accusation which I
bring against them--not one of them is worthy of the philosophic nature,
and hence that nature is warped and estranged;--as the exotic
seed which is sown in a foreign land becomes denaturalized,
and is wont to be overpowered and to lose itself in the new soil,
even so this growth of philosophy, instead of persisting,
degenerates and receives another character.  But if philosophy ever
finds in the State that perfection which she herself is, then will
be seen that she is in truth divine, and that all other things,
whether natures of men or institutions, are but human;--and now,
I know that you are going to ask, what that State is.

No, he said; there you are wrong, for I was going to ask another question--
whether it is the State of which.  we are the founders and inventors,
or some other?

Yes, I replied, ours in most respects; but you may remember my
saying before, that some living authority would always be required
in the State having the same idea of the constitution which guided
you when as legislator you were laying down the laws.

That was said, he replied.

Yes, but not in a satisfactory manner; you frightened us by
interposing objections, which certainly showed that the discussion
would be long and difficult; and what still remains is the reverse of easy.

What is there remaining?

The question how the study of philosophy may be so ordered as not to be
the ruin of the State:  All great attempts are attended with risk;
`hard is the good,' as men say.

Still, he said, let the point be cleared up, and the enquiry
will then be complete.

I shall not be hindered, I said, by any want of will, but, if at all,
by a want of power:  my zeal you may see for yourselves; and please
to remark in what I am about to say how boldly and unhesitatingly I
declare that States should pursue philosophy, not as they do now,
but in a different spirit.

In what manner?

At present, I said, the students of philosophy are quite young;
beginning when they are hardly past childhood, they devote only the time
saved from moneymaking and housekeeping to such pursuits; and even
those of them who are reputed to have most of the philosophic spirit,
when they come within sight of the great difficulty of the subject,
I mean dialectic, take themselves off.  In after life when invited
by some one else, they may, perhaps, go and hear a lecture,
and about this they make much ado, for philosophy is not considered
by them to be their proper business:  at last, when they grow old,
in most cases they are extinguished more truly than Heracleitus'
sun, inasmuch as they never light up again.

But what ought to be their course?

Just the opposite.  In childhood and youth their study, and what
philosophy they learn, should be suited to their tender years: 
during this period while they are growing up towards manhood,
the chief and special care should be given to their bodies
that they may have them to use in the service of philosophy;
as life advances and the intellect begins to mature, let them increase
the gymnastics of the soul; but when the strength of our citizens
fails and is past civil and military duties, then let them range
at will and engage in no serious labour, as we intend them to live
happily here, and to crown this life with a similar happiness
in another.

How truly in earnest you are, Socrates! he said; I am sure of that;
and yet most of your hearers, if I am not mistaken, are likely to be still
more earnest in their opposition to you, and will never be convinced;
Thrasymachus least of all.

Do not make a quarrel, I said, between Thrasymachus and me, who have
recently become friends, although, indeed, we were never enemies;
for I shall go on striving to the utmost until I either convert him
and other men, or do something which may profit them against the day
when they live again, and hold the like discourse in another state
of existence.

You are speaking of a time which is not very near.

Rather, I replied, of a time which is as nothing in comparison
with eternity.  Nevertheless, I do not wonder that the many refuse
to believe; for they have never seen that of which we are now
speaking realised; they have seen only a conventional imitation
of philosophy, consisting of words artificially brought together,
not like these of ours having a natural unity.  But a human being
who in word and work is perfectly moulded, as far as he can be,
into the proportion and likeness of virtue--such a man ruling
in a city which bears the same image, they have never yet seen,
neither one nor many of them--do you think that they ever did?

No indeed.

No, my friend, and they have seldom, if ever, heard free and noble sentiments;
such as men utter when they are earnestly and by every means in their
power seeking after truth for the sake of knowledge, while they look
coldly on the subtleties of controversy, of which the end is opinion
and strife, whether they meet with them in the courts of law or in society.

They are strangers, he said, to the words of which you speak.

And this was what we foresaw, and this was the reason why truth
forced us to admit, not without fear and hesitation, that neither
cities nor States nor individuals will ever attain perfection until
the small class of philosophers whom we termed useless but not
corrupt are providentially compelled, whether they will or not,
to take care of the State, and until a like necessity be laid
on the State to obey them; or until kings, or if not kings,
the sons of kings or princes, are divinely inspired with a true
love of true philosophy.  That either or both of these alternatives
are impossible, I see no reason to affirm:  if they were so,
we might indeed be justly ridiculed as dreamers and visionaries. 
Am I not right?

Quite right.

If then, in the countless ages of the past, or at the present
hour in some foreign clime which is far away and beyond our ken,
the perfected philosopher is or has been or hereafter shall be
compelled by a superior power to have the charge of the State,
we are ready to assert to the death, that this our constitution has been,
and is--yea, and will be whenever the Muse of Philosophy is queen. 
There is no impossibility in all this; that there is a difficulty,
we acknowledge ourselves.

My opinion agrees with yours, he said.

But do you mean to say that this is not the opinion of the multitude?

I should imagine not, he replied.

O my friend, I said, do not attack the multitude:  they will change
their minds, if, not in an aggressive spirit, but gently and with
the view of soothing them and removing their dislike of over-education,
you show them your philosophers as they really are and describe
as you were just now doing their character and profession,
and then mankind will see that he of whom you are speaking is not
such as they supposed--if they view him in this new light, they will
surely change their notion of him, and answer in another strain. 
Who can be at enmity with one who loves them, who that is himself
gentle and free from envy will be jealous of one in whom there
is no jealousy?  Nay, let me answer for you, that in a few this
harsh temper may be found but not in the majority of mankind.

I quite agree with you, he said.

And do you not also think, as I do, that the harsh feeling which
the many entertain towards philosophy originates in the pretenders,
who rush in uninvited, and are always abusing them, and finding fault
with them, who make persons instead of things the theme of their
conversation? and nothing can be more unbecoming in philosophers
than this.

It is most unbecoming.

For he, Adeimantus, whose mind is fixed upon true being,
has surely no time to look down upon the affairs of earth,
or to be filled with malice and envy, contending against men;
his eye is ever directed towards things fixed and immutable,
which he sees neither injuring nor injured by one another,
but all in order moving according to reason; these he imitates,
and to these he will, as far as he can, conform himself.  Can a man
help imitating that with which he holds reverential converse?

Impossible.

And the philosopher holding converse with the divine order,
becomes orderly and divine, as far as the nature of man allows;
but like every one else, he will suffer from detraction.

Of course.

And if a necessity be laid upon him of fashioning, not only himself,
but human nature generally, whether in States or individuals,
into that which he beholds elsewhere, will he, think you, be an
unskilful artificer of justice, temperance, and every civil virtue?

Anything but unskilful.

And if the world perceives that what we are saying about him is the truth,
will they be angry with philosophy?  Will they disbelieve us,
when we tell them that no State can be happy which is not designed
by artists who imitate the heavenly pattern?

They will not be angry if they understand, he said.  But how will
they draw out the plan of which you are speaking?

They will begin by taking the State and the manners of men,
from which, as from a tablet, they will rub out the picture, and leave
a clean surface.  This is no easy task.  But whether easy or not,
herein will lie the difference between them and every other legislator,--
they will have nothing to do either with individual or State, and will
inscribe no laws, until they have either found, or themselves made,
a clean surface.

They will be very right, he said.

Having effected this, they will proceed to trace an outline
of the constitution?

No doubt.

And when they are filling in the work, as I conceive, they will
often turn their eyes upwards and downwards:  I mean that they
will first look at absolute justice and beauty and temperance,
and again at the human copy; and will mingle and temper the various
elements of life into the image of a man; and thus they will conceive
according to that other image, which, when existing among men,
Homer calls the form and likeness of God.

Very true, he said.

And one feature they will erase, and another they will put in,
they have made the ways of men, as far as possible, agreeable to
the ways of God?

Indeed, he said, in no way could they make a fairer picture.

And now, I said, are we beginning to persuade those whom you
described as rushing at us with might and main, that the painter
of constitutions is such an one as we are praising; at whom they
were so very indignant because to his hands we committed the State;
and are they growing a little calmer at what they have just heard?

Much calmer, if there is any sense in them.

Why, where can they still find any ground for objection? 
Will they doubt that the philosopher is a lover of truth and being?

They would not be so unreasonable.

Or that his nature, being such as we have delineated, is akin
to the highest good?

Neither can they doubt this.

But again, will they tell us that such a nature, placed under
favourable circumstances, will not be perfectly good and wise
if any ever was?  Or will they prefer those whom we have rejected?

Surely not.

Then will they still be angry at our saying, that, until philosophers
bear rule, States and individuals will have no rest from evil,
nor will this our imaginary State ever be realised?

I think that they will be less angry.

Shall we assume that they are not only less angry but quite gentle,
and that they have been converted and for very shame, if for no
other reason, cannot refuse to come to terms?

By all means, he said.

Then let us suppose that the reconciliation has been effected. 
Will any one deny the other point, that there may be sons of kings
or princes who are by nature philosophers?

Surely no man, he said.

And when they have come into being will any one say that they must
of necessity be destroyed; that they can hardly be saved is not
denied even by us; but that in the whole course of ages no single
one of them can escape--who will venture to affirm this?

Who indeed!

But, said I, one is enough; let there be one man who has a city
obedient to his will, and he might bring into existence the ideal
polity about which the world is so incredulous.

Yes, one is enough.

The ruler may impose the laws and institutions which we have
been describing, and the citizens may possibly be willing to obey them?

Certainly.

And that others should approve of what we approve, is no miracle
or impossibility?

I think not.

But we have sufficiently shown, in what has preceded, that all this,
if only possible, is assuredly for the best.

We have.

And now we say not only that our laws, if they could be enacted,
would be for the best, but also that the enactment of them,
though difficult, is not impossible.

Very good.

And so with pain and toil we have reached the end of one subject,
but more remains to be discussed;--how and by what studies and pursuits
will the saviours of the constitution be created, and at what ages
are they to apply themselves to their several studies?

Certainly.

I omitted the troublesome business of the possession of women,
and the procreation of children, and the appointment of the rulers,
because I knew that the perfect State would be eyed with jealousy
and was difficult of attainment; but that piece of cleverness was
not of much service to me, for I had to discuss them all the same. 
The women and children are now disposed of, but the other question
of the rulers must be investigated from the very beginning. 
We were saying, as you will remember, that they were to be lovers
of their country, tried by the test of pleasures and pains,
and neither in hardships, nor in dangers, nor at any other critical
moment were to lose their patriotism--he was to be rejected
who failed, but he who always came forth pure, like gold tried
in the refiner's fire, was to be made a ruler, and to receive
honours and rewards in life and after death.  This was the sort
of thing which was being said, and then the argument turned aside
and veiled her face; not liking to stir the question which has
now arisen.

I perfectly remember, he said.

Yes, my friend, I said, and I then shrank from hazarding the bold word;
but now let me dare to say--that the perfect guardian must be
a philosopher.

Yes, he said, let that be affirmed.

And do not suppose that there will be many of them; for the gifts
which were deemed by us to be essential rarely grow together;
they are mostly found in shreds and patches.

What do you mean? he said.

You are aware, I replied, that quick intelligence, memory, sagacity,
cleverness, and similar qualities, do not often grow together,
and that persons who possess them and are at the same time
high-spirited and magnanimous are not so constituted by nature
as to live orderly and in a peaceful and settled manner; they are
driven any way by their impulses, and all solid principle goes out of them.

Very true, he said.

On the other hand, those steadfast natures which can better be
depended upon, which in a battle are impregnable to fear and immovable,
are equally immovable when there is anything to be learned;
they are always in a torpid state, and are apt to yawn and go
to sleep over any intellectual toil.

Quite true.

And yet we were saying that both qualities were necessary
in those to whom the higher education is to be imparted,
and who are to share in any office or command.

Certainly, he said.

And will they be a class which is rarely found?

Yes, indeed.

Then the aspirant must not only be tested in those labours
and dangers and pleasures which we mentioned before, but there
is another kind of probation which we did not mention--he must be
exercised also in many kinds of knowledge, to see whether the soul
will be able to endure the highest of all, will faint under them,
as in any other studies and exercises.

Yes, he said, you are quite right in testing him.  But what do you
mean by the highest of all knowledge?

You may remember, I said, that we divided the soul into three parts;
and distinguished the several natures of justice, temperance, courage,
and wisdom?

Indeed, he said, if I had forgotten, I should not deserve to hear more.

And do you remember the word of caution which preceded the discussion
of them?

To what do you refer?

We were saying, if I am not mistaken, that he who wanted to see them
in their perfect beauty must take a longer and more circuitous way,
at the end of which they would appear; but that we could add on a popular
exposition of them on a level with the discussion which had preceded. 
And you replied that such an exposition would be enough for you,
and so the enquiry was continued in what to me seemed to be a very
inaccurate manner; whether you were satisfied or not, it is for you
to say.

Yes, he said, I thought and the others thought that you gave us
a fair measure of truth.

But, my friend, I said, a measure of such things Which in any degree
falls short of the whole truth is not fair measure; for nothing
imperfect is the measure of anything, although persons are too apt
to be contented and think that they need search no further.

Not an uncommon case when people are indolent.

Yes, I said; and there cannot be any worse fault in a guardian
of the State and of the laws.

True.

The guardian then, I said, must be required to take the longer circuit,
and toll at learning as well as at gymnastics, or he will never reach
the highest knowledge of all which, as we were just now saying,
is his proper calling.

What, he said, is there a knowledge still higher than this--
higher than justice and the other virtues?

Yes, I said, there is.  And of the virtues too we must behold not
the outline merely, as at present--nothing short of the most finished
picture should satisfy us.  When little things are elaborated
with an infinity of pains, in order that they may appear in their
full beauty and utmost clearness, how ridiculous that we should
not think the highest truths worthy of attaining the highest accuracy!

A right noble thought; but do you suppose that we shall refrain
from asking you what is this highest knowledge?

Nay, I said, ask if you will; but I am certain that you have heard
the answer many times, and now you either do not understand me or,
as I rather think, you are disposed to be troublesome; for you
have of been told that the idea of good is the highest knowledge,
and that all other things become useful and advantageous only
by their use of this.  You can hardly be ignorant that of this
I was about to speak, concerning which, as you have often heard
me say, we know so little; and, without which, any other knowledge
or possession of any kind will profit us nothing.  Do you think
that the possession of all other things is of any value if we do
not possess the good? or the knowledge of all other things if we
have no knowledge of beauty and goodness?

Assuredly not.

You are further aware that most people affirm pleasure to be the good,
but the finer sort of wits say it is knowledge

Yes.

And you are aware too that the latter cannot explain what they mean
by knowledge, but are obliged after all to say knowledge of the good?

How ridiculous!

Yes, I said, that they should begin by reproaching us with our
ignorance of the good, and then presume our knowledge of it--
for the good they define to be knowledge of the good, just as if we
understood them when they use the term `good'--this is of course ridiculous.

Most true, he said.

And those who make pleasure their good are in equal perplexity;
for they are compelled to admit that there are bad pleasures as well
as good.

Certainly.

And therefore to acknowledge that bad and good are the same?

True.

There can be no doubt about the numerous difficulties in which this
question is involved.

There can be none.

Further, do we not see that many are willing to do or to have
or to seem to be what is just and honourable without the reality;
but no one is satisfied with the appearance of good--the reality
is what they seek; in the case of the good, appearance is despised
by every one.

Very true, he said.

Of this then, which every soul of man pursues and makes the end
of all his actions, having a presentiment that there is such an end,
and yet hesitating because neither knowing the nature nor having
the same assurance of this as of other things, and therefore
losing whatever good there is in other things,--of a principle
such and so great as this ought the best men in our State, to whom
everything is entrusted, to be in the darkness of ignorance?

Certainly not, he said.

I am sure, I said, that he who does not know now the beautiful
and the just are likewise good will be but a sorry guardian of them;
and I suspect that no one who is ignorant of the good will have a true
knowledge of them.

That, he said, is a shrewd suspicion of yours.

And if we only have a guardian who has this knowledge our State
will be perfectly ordered?

Of course, he replied; but I wish that you would tell me whether
you conceive this supreme principle of the good to be knowledge
or pleasure, or different from either.

Aye, I said, I knew all along that a fastidious gentleman like you
would not be contented with the thoughts of other people about
these matters.

True, Socrates; but I must say that one who like you has passed
a lifetime in the study of philosophy should not be always repeating
the opinions of others, and never telling his own.

Well, but has any one a right to say positively what he does not know?

Not, he said, with the assurance of positive certainty;
he has no right to do that:  but he may say what he thinks,
as a matter of opinion.

And do you not know, I said, that all mere opinions are bad,
and the best of them blind?  You would not deny that those who
have any true notion without intelligence are only like blind
men who feel their way along the road?

Very true.

And do you wish to behold what is blind and crooked and base,
when others will tell you of brightness and beauty?

GLAUCON - SOCRATES

Still, I must implore you, Socrates, said Glaucon, not to turn
away just as you are reaching the goal; if you will only give such
an explanation of the good as you have already given of justice
and temperance and the other virtues, we shall be satisfied.

Yes, my friend, and I shall be at least equally satisfied,
but I cannot help fearing that I shall fall, and that my indiscreet
zeal will bring ridicule upon me.  No, sweet sirs, let us not at
present ask what is the actual nature of the good, for to reach
what is now in my thoughts would be an effort too great for me. 
But of the child of the good who is likest him, I would fain speak,
if I could be sure that you wished to hear--otherwise, not.

By all means, he said, tell us about the child, and you shall
remain in our debt for the account of the parent.

I do indeed wish, I replied, that I could pay, and you receive,
the account of the parent, and not, as now, of the offspring only;
take, however, this latter by way of interest, and at the same time
have a care that i do not render a false account, although I have
no intention of deceiving you.

Yes, we will take all the care that we can:  proceed.

Yes, I said, but I must first come to an understanding with you,
and remind you of what I have mentioned in the course of this discussion,
and at many other times.

What?

The old story, that there is a many beautiful and a many good,
and so of other things which we describe and define; to all of them
`many' is applied.

True, he said.

And there is an absolute beauty and an absolute good, and of other
things to which the term `many' is applied there is an absolute;
for they may be brought under a single idea, which is called
the essence of each.

Very true.

The many, as we say, are seen but not known, and the ideas are known
but not seen.

Exactly.

And what is the organ with which we see the visible things?

The sight, he said.

And with the hearing, I said, we hear, and with the other senses
perceive the other objects of sense?

True.

But have you remarked that sight is by far the most costly and complex
piece of workmanship which the artificer of the senses ever contrived?

No, I never have, he said.

Then reflect; has the ear or voice need of any third or additional
nature in order that the one may be able to hear and the other
to be heard?

Nothing of the sort.

No, indeed, I replied; and the same is true of most, if not all,
the other senses--you would not say that any of them requires such
an addition?

Certainly not.

But you see that without the addition of some other nature there
is no seeing or being seen?

How do you mean?

Sight being, as I conceive, in the eyes, and he who has eyes
wanting to see; colour being also present in them, still unless
there be a third nature specially adapted to the purpose, the owner
of the eyes will see nothing and the colours will be invisible.

Of what nature are you speaking?

Of that which you term light, I replied.

True, he said.

Noble, then, is the bond which links together sight and visibility,
and great beyond other bonds by no small difference of nature;
for light is their bond, and light is no ignoble thing?

Nay, he said, the reverse of ignoble.

And which, I said, of the gods in heaven would you say was the lord
of this element?  Whose is that light which makes the eye to see
perfectly and the visible to appear?

You mean the sun, as you and all mankind say.

May not the relation of sight to this deity be described as follows?

How?

Neither sight nor the eye in which sight resides is the sun?

No.

Yet of all the organs of sense the eye is the most like the sun?

By far the most like.

And the power which the eye possesses is a sort of effluence
which is dispensed from the sun?

Exactly.

Then the sun is not sight, but the author of sight who is recognised
by sight.

True, he said.

And this is he whom I call the child of the good, whom the good
begat in his own likeness, to be in the visible world, in relation
to sight and the things of sight, what the good is in the intellectual
world in relation to mind and the things of mind.

Will you be a little more explicit? he said.

Why, you know, I said, that the eyes, when a person directs them
towards objects on which the light of day is no longer shining,
but the moon and stars only, see dimly, and are nearly blind;
they seem to have no clearness of vision in them?

Very true.

But when they are directed towards objects on which the sun shines,
they see clearly and there is sight in them?

Certainly.

And the soul is like the eye:  when resting upon that on which truth
and being shine, the soul perceives and understands and is radiant
with intelligence; but when turned towards the twilight of becoming
and perishing, then she has opinion only, and goes blinking about,
and is first of one opinion and then of another, and seems to have
no intelligence?

Just so.

Now, that which imparts truth to the known and the power of knowing
to the knower is what I would have you term the idea of good,
and this you will deem to be the cause of science, and of truth
in so far as the latter becomes the subject of knowledge;
beautiful too, as are both truth and knowledge, you will be right
in esteeming this other nature as more beautiful than either;
and, as in the previous instance, light and sight may be truly said
to be like the sun, and yet not to be the sun, so in this other sphere,
science and truth may be deemed to be like the good, but not the good;
the good has a place of honour yet higher.

What a wonder of beauty that must be, he said, which is the author
of science and truth, and yet surpasses them in beauty; for you
surely cannot mean to say that pleasure is the good?

God forbid, I replied; but may I ask you to consider the image
in another point of view?

In what point of view?

You would say, would you not, that the sun is only the author of
visibility in all visible things, but of generation and nourishment
and growth, though he himself is not generation?

Certainly.

In like manner the good may be said to be not only the author
of knowledge to all things known, but of their being and essence,
and yet the good is not essence, but far exceeds essence in dignity
and power.

Glaucon said, with a ludicrous earnestness:  By the light of heaven,
how amazing!

Yes, I said, and the exaggeration may be set down to you;
for you made me utter my fancies.

And pray continue to utter them; at any rate let us hear if there
is anything more to be said about the similitude of the sun.

Yes, I said, there is a great deal more.

Then omit nothing, however slight.

I will do my best, I said; but I should think that a great deal
will have to be omitted.

You have to imagine, then, that there are two ruling powers, and that one
of them is set over the intellectual world, the other over the visible. 
I do not say heaven, lest you should fancy that I am playing upon
the name ('ourhanoz, orhatoz'). May I suppose that you have this
distinction of the visible and intelligible fixed in your mind?

I have.

Now take a line which has been cut into two unequal parts, and divide
each of them again in the same proportion, and suppose the two main
divisions to answer, one to the visible and the other to the intelligible,
and then compare the subdivisions in respect of their clearness
and want of clearness, and you will find that the first section in
the sphere of the visible consists of images.  And by images I mean,
in the first place, shadows, and in the second place, reflections in water
and in solid, smooth and polished bodies and the like:  Do you understand?

Yes, I understand.

Imagine, now, the other section, of which this is only the resemblance,
to include the animals which we see, and everything that grows
or is made.

Very good.

Would you not admit that both the sections of this division have
different degrees of truth, and that the copy is to the original
as the sphere of opinion is to the sphere of knowledge?

Most undoubtedly.

Next proceed to consider the manner in which the sphere
of the intellectual is to be divided.

In what manner?

Thus:--There are two subdivisions, in the lower or which the soul
uses the figures given by the former division as images;
the enquiry can only be hypothetical, and instead of going upwards
to a principle descends to the other end; in the higher of the two,
the soul passes out of hypotheses, and goes up to a principle which
is above hypotheses, making no use of images as in the former case,
but proceeding only in and through the ideas themselves.

I do not quite understand your meaning, he said.

Then I will try again; you will understand me better when I
have made some preliminary remarks.  You are aware that students
of geometry, arithmetic, and the kindred sciences assume the odd
and the even and the figures and three kinds of angles and the like
in their several branches of science; these are their hypotheses,
which they and everybody are supposed to know, and therefore they do
not deign to give any account of them either to themselves or others;
but they begin with them, and go on until they arrive at last,
and in a consistent manner, at their conclusion?

Yes, he said, I know.

And do you not know also that although they make use of the visible
forms and reason about them, they are thinking not of these, but of
the ideals which they resemble; not of the figures which they draw,
but of the absolute square and the absolute diameter, and so on--
the forms which they draw or make, and which have shadows and
reflections in water of their own, are converted by them into images,
but they are really seeking to behold the things themselves,
which can only be seen with the eye of the mind?

That is true.

And of this kind I spoke as the intelligible, although in the search
after it the soul is compelled to use hypotheses; not ascending
to a first principle, because she is unable to rise above the region
of hypothesis, but employing the objects of which the shadows below
are resemblances in their turn as images, they having in relation
to the shadows and reflections of them a greater distinctness,
and therefore a higher value.

I understand, he said, that you are speaking of the province
of geometry and the sister arts.

And when I speak of the other division of the intelligible,
you will understand me to speak of that other sort of knowledge
which reason herself attains by the power of dialectic,
using the hypotheses not as first principles, but only as hypotheses--
that is to say, as steps and points of departure into a world
which is above hypotheses, in order that she may soar beyond them
to the first principle of the whole; and clinging to this and then
to that which depends on this, by successive steps she descends again
without the aid of any sensible object, from ideas, through ideas,
and in ideas she ends.

I understand you, he replied; not perfectly, for you seem to me
to be describing a task which is really tremendous; but, at any rate,
I understand you to say that knowledge and being, which the science
of dialectic contemplates, are clearer than the notions of the arts,
as they are termed, which proceed from hypotheses only: 
these are also contemplated by the understanding, and not by
the senses:  yet, because they start from hypotheses and do not
ascend to a principle, those who contemplate them appear to you
not to exercise the higher reason upon them, although when a first
principle is added to them they are cognizable by the higher reason. 
And the habit which is concerned with geometry and the cognate
sciences I suppose that you would term understanding and not reason,
as being intermediate between opinion and reason.

You have quite conceived my meaning, I said; and now, corresponding to
these four divisions, let there be four faculties in the soul-reason
answering to the highest, understanding to the second, faith (or conviction)
to the third, and perception of shadows to the last-and let there
be a scale of them, and let us suppose that the several faculties
have clearness in the same degree that their objects have truth.

I understand, he replied, and give my assent, and accept your arrangement.

BOOK VII

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

AND now, I said, let me show in a figure how far our nature is enlightened
or unenlightened:--Behold! human beings living in a underground den,
which has a mouth open towards the light and reaching all along the den;
here they have been from their childhood, and have their legs and necks
chained so that they cannot move, and can only see before them,
being prevented by the chains from turning round their heads. 
Above and behind them a fire is blazing at a distance,
and between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way;
and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along the way,
like the screen which marionette players have in front of them,
over which they show the puppets.

I see.

And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying all
sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of wood
and stone and various materials, which appear over the wall? 
Some of them are talking, others silent.

You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange prisoners.

Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows,
or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the opposite
wall of the cave?

True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows if they
were never allowed to move their heads?

And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they
would only see the shadows?

Yes, he said.

And if they were able to converse with one another, would they
not suppose that they were naming what was actually before them?

Very true.

And suppose further that the prison had an echo which came from the
other side, would they not be sure to fancy when one of the passers-by
spoke that the voice which they heard came from the passing shadow?

No question, he replied.

To them, I said, the truth would be literally nothing but the shadows
of the images.

That is certain.

And now look again, and see what will naturally follow it'
the prisoners are released and disabused of their error.  At first,
when any of them is liberated and compelled suddenly to stand
up and turn his neck round and walk and look towards the light,
he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him, and he
will be unable to see the realities of which in his former state
he had seen the shadows; and then conceive some one saying to him,
that what he saw before was an illusion, but that now, when he
is approaching nearer to being and his eye is turned towards more
real existence, he has a clearer vision, -what will be his reply? 
And you may further imagine that his instructor is pointing
to the objects as they pass and requiring him to name them,
-will he not be perplexed?  Will he not fancy that the shadows
which he formerly saw are truer than the objects which are now shown
to him?

Far truer.

And if he is compelled to look straight at the light, will he
not have a pain in his eyes which will make him turn away to take
and take in the objects of vision which he can see, and which he
will conceive to be in reality clearer than the things which are
now being shown to him?

True, he now

And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep
and rugged ascent, and held fast until he's forced into the presence
of the sun himself, is he not likely to be pained and irritated? 
When he approaches the light his eyes will be dazzled, and he will not
be able to see anything at all of what are now called realities.

Not all in a moment, he said.

He will require to grow accustomed to the sight of the upper world. 
And first he will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men
and other objects in the water, and then the objects themselves;
then he will gaze upon the light of the moon and the stars and the
spangled heaven; and he will see the sky and the stars by night better
than the sun or the light of the sun by day?

Certainly.

Last of he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflections
of him in the water, but he will see him in his own proper place,
and not in another; and he will contemplate him as he is.

Certainly.

He will then proceed to argue that this is he who gives the season
and the years, and is the guardian of all that is in the visible world,
and in a certain way the cause of all things which he and his fellows
have been accustomed to behold?

Clearly, he said, he would first see the sun and then reason about him.

And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom of the den
and his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he would felicitate
himself on the change, and pity them?

Certainly, he would.

And if they were in the habit of conferring honours among themselves
on those who were quickest to observe the passing shadows and
to remark which of them went before, and which followed after,
and which were together; and who were therefore best able to draw
conclusions as to the future, do you think that he would care
for such honours and glories, or envy the possessors of them? 
Would he not say with Homer,

          Better to be the poor servant of a poor master,

and to endure anything, rather than think as they do and live
after their manner?

Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything than
entertain these false notions and live in this miserable manner.

Imagine once more, I said, such an one coming suddenly out of the sun
to be replaced in his old situation; would he not be certain
to have his eyes full of darkness?

To be sure, he said.

And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in measuring
the shadows with the prisoners who had never moved out of the den,
while his sight was still weak, and before his eyes had become steady
(and the time which would be needed to acquire this new habit
of sight might be very considerable) would he not be ridiculous? 
Men would say of him that up he went and down he came without
his eyes; and that it was better not even to think of ascending;
and if any one tried to loose another and lead him up to the light,
let them only catch the offender, and they would put him
to death.

No question, he said.

This entire allegory, I said, you may now append, dear Glaucon,
to the previous argument; the prison-house is the world of sight,
the light of the fire is the sun, and you will not misapprehend me
if you interpret the journey upwards to be the ascent of the soul
into the intellectual world according to my poor belief, which,
at your desire, I have expressed whether rightly or wrongly
God knows.  But, whether true or false, my opinion is that in
the world of knowledge the idea of good appears last of all,
and is seen only with an effort; and, when seen, is also inferred
to be the universal author of all things beautiful and right,
parent of light and of the lord of light in this visible world,
and the immediate source of reason and truth in the intellectual;
and that this is the power upon which he who would act rationally,
either in public or private life must have his eye fixed.

I agree, he said, as far as I am able to understand you.

Moreover, I said, you must not wonder that those who attain
to this beatific vision are unwilling to descend to human affairs;
for their souls are ever hastening into the upper world where they
desire to dwell; which desire of theirs is very natural, if our
allegory may be trusted.

Yes, very natural.

And is there anything surprising in one who passes from divine
contemplations to the evil state of man, misbehaving himself in a
ridiculous manner; if, while his eyes are blinking and before he
has become accustomed to the surrounding darkness, he is compelled
to fight in courts of law, or in other places, about the images
or the shadows of images of justice, and is endeavouring to meet
the conceptions of those who have never yet seen absolute justice?

Anything but surprising, he replied.

Any one who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments
of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes,
either from coming out of the light or from going into the light,
which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye;
and he who remembers this when he sees any one whose vision is
perplexed and weak, will not be too ready to laugh; he will first
ask whether that soul of man has come out of the brighter light,
and is unable to see because unaccustomed to the dark, or having
turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by excess of light. 
And he will count the one happy in his condition and state of being,
and he will pity the other; or, if he have a mind to laugh at the soul
which comes from below into the light, there will be more reason in this
than in the laugh which greets him who returns from above out of
the light into the den.

That, he said, is a very just distinction.

But then, if I am right, certain professors of education must
be wrong when they say that they can put a knowledge into the soul
which was not there before, like sight into blind eyes.

They undoubtedly say this, he replied.

Whereas, our argument shows that the power and capacity of
learning exists in the soul already; and that just as the eye
was unable to turn from darkness to light without the whole body,
so too the instrument of knowledge can only by the movement
of the whole soul be turned from the world of becoming into
that of being, and learn by degrees to endure the sight of being,
and of the brightest and best of being, or in other words, of the good.

Very true.

And must there not be some art which will effect conversion in
the easiest and quickest manner; not implanting the faculty of sight,
for that exists already, but has been turned in the wrong direction,
and is looking away from the truth?

Yes, he said, such an art may be presumed.

And whereas the other so-called virtues of the soul seem to be
akin to bodily qualities, for even when they are not originally
innate they can be implanted later by habit and exercise,
the of wisdom more than anything else contains a divine element
which always remains, and by this conversion is rendered useful
and profitable; or, on the other hand, hurtful and useless. 
Did you never observe the narrow intelligence flashing from the keen
eye of a clever rogue--how eager he is, how clearly his paltry soul
sees the way to his end; he is the reverse of blind, but his keen
eyesight is forced into the service of evil, and he is mischievous
in proportion to his cleverness.

Very true, he said.

But what if there had been a circumcision of such natures in the days
of their youth; and they had been severed from those sensual pleasures,
such as eating and drinking, which, like leaden weights, were attached
to them at their birth, and which drag them down and turn the vision
of their souls upon the things that are below--if, I say, they had been
released from these impediments and turned in the opposite direction,
the very same faculty in them would have seen the truth as keenly
as they see what their eyes are turned to now.

Very likely.

Yes, I said; and there is another thing which is likely. 
or rather a necessary inference from what has preceded, that neither
the uneducated and uninformed of the truth, nor yet those who never
make an end of their education, will be able ministers of State;
not the former, because they have no single aim of duty which
is the rule of all their actions, private as well as public;
nor the latter, because they will not act at all except upon compulsion,
fancying that they are already dwelling apart in the islands of
the blest.

Very true, he replied.

Then, I said, the business of us who are the founders of the State
will be to compel the best minds to attain that knowledge which we
have already shown to be the greatest of all-they must continue
to ascend until they arrive at the good; but when they have ascended
and seen enough we must not allow them to do as they do now.

What do you mean?

I mean that they remain in the upper world:  but this must not be allowed;
they must be made to descend again among the prisoners in the den,
and partake of their labours and honours, whether they are worth
having or not.

But is not this unjust? he said; ought we to give them a worse life,
when they might have a better?

You have again forgotten, my friend, I said, the intention of
the legislator, who did not aim at making any one class in the State
happy above the rest; the happiness was to be in the whole State,
and he held the citizens together by persuasion and necessity,
making them benefactors of the State, and therefore benefactors
of one another; to this end he created them, not to please themselves,
but to be his instruments in binding up the State.

True, he said, I had forgotten.

Observe, Glaucon, that there will be no injustice in compelling
our philosophers to have a care and providence of others; we shall
explain to them that in other States, men of their class are not
obliged to share in the toils of politics:  and this is reasonable,
for they grow up at their own sweet will, and the government would
rather not have them.  Being self-taught, they cannot be expected
to show any gratitude for a culture which they have never received. 
But we have brought you into the world to be rulers of the hive,
kings of yourselves and of the other citizens, and have educated you
far better and more perfectly than they have been educated, and you
are better able to share in the double duty.  Wherefore each of you,
when his turn comes, must go down to the general underground abode,
and get the habit of seeing in the dark.  When you have acquired the habit,
you will see ten thousand times better than the inhabitants of the den,
and you will know what the several images are, and what they represent,
because you have seen the beautiful and just and good in their truth. 
And thus our State which is also yours will be a reality,
and not a dream only, and will be administered in a spirit unlike
that of other States, in which men fight with one another about
shadows only and are distracted in the struggle for power, which in
their eyes is a great good.  Whereas the truth is that the State
in which the rulers are most reluctant to govern is always the best
and most quietly governed, and the State in which they are most eager,
the worst.

Quite true, he replied.

And will our pupils, when they hear this, refuse to take their turn
at the toils of State, when they are allowed to spend the greater
part of their time with one another in the heavenly light?

Impossible, he answered; for they are just men, and the commands
which we impose upon them are just; there can be no doubt
that every one of them will take office as a stern necessity,
and not after the fashion of our present rulers of State.

Yes, my friend, I said; and there lies the point.  You must contrive
for your future rulers another and a better life than that of a ruler,
and then you may have a well-ordered State; for only in the State which
offers this, will they rule who are truly rich, not in silver and gold,
but in virtue and wisdom, which are the true blessings of life. 
Whereas if they go to the administration of public affairs,
poor and hungering after the' own private advantage, thinking that
hence they are to snatch the chief good, order there can never be;
for they will be fighting about office, and the civil and domestic
broils which thus arise will be the ruin of the rulers themselves and
of the whole State.

Most true, he replied.

And the only life which looks down upon the life of political
ambition is that of true philosophy.  Do you know of any other?

Indeed, I do not, he said.

And those who govern ought not to be lovers of the task? 
For, if they are, there will be rival lovers, and they will fight.

No question.

Who then are those whom we shall compel to be guardians? 
Surely they will be the men who are wisest about affairs of State,
and by whom the State is best administered, and who at the same
time have other honours and another and a better life than that
of politics?

They are the men, and I will choose them, he replied.

And now shall we consider in what way such guardians will be produced,
and how they are to be brought from darkness to light,--as some are
said to have ascended from the world below to the gods?

By all means, he replied.

The process, I said, is not the turning over of an oyster-shell,
but the turning round of a soul passing from a day which is little
better than night to the true day of being, that is, the ascent
from below, which we affirm to be true philosophy?

Quite so.

And should we not enquire what sort of knowledge has the power
of effecting such a change?

Certainly.

What sort of knowledge is there which would draw the soul from becoming
to being?  And another consideration has just occurred to me: 
You will remember that our young men are to be warrior athletes

Yes, that was said.

Then this new kind of knowledge must have an additional quality?

What quality?

Usefulness in war.

Yes, if possible.

There were two parts in our former scheme of education, were there not?

Just so.

There was gymnastic which presided over the growth and decay of the body,
and may therefore be regarded as having to do with generation and corruption?

True.

Then that is not the knowledge which we are seeking to discover? 
No.

But what do you say of music, which also entered to a certain
extent into our former scheme?

Music, he said, as you will remember, was the counterpart of gymnastic,
and trained the guardians by the influences of habit, by harmony making
them harmonious, by rhythm rhythmical, but not giving them science;
and the words, whether fabulous or possibly true, had kindred elements
of rhythm and harmony in them.  But in music there was nothing
which tended to that good which you are now seeking.

You are most accurate, I said, in your recollection; in music there
certainly was nothing of the kind.  But what branch of knowledge
is there, my dear Glaucon, which is of the desired nature;
since all the useful arts were reckoned mean by us?

Undoubtedly; and yet if music and gymnastic are excluded,
and the arts are also excluded, what remains?

Well, I said, there may be nothing left of our special subjects;
and then we shall have to take something which is not special,
but of universal application.

What may that be?

A something which all arts and sciences and intelligences use
in common, and which every one first has to learn among the elements
of education.

What is that?

The little matter of distinguishing one, two, and three--in a word,
number and calculation:--do not all arts and sciences necessarily
partake of them?

Yes.

Then the art of war partakes of them?

To the sure.

Then Palamedes, whenever he appears in tragedy, proves Agamemnon
ridiculously unfit to be a general.  Did you never remark how he
declares that he had invented number, and had numbered the ships
and set in array the ranks of the army at Troy; which implies
that they had never been numbered before, and Agamemnon must be
supposed literally to have been incapable of counting his own feet--
how could he if he was ignorant of number?  And if that is true,
what sort of general must he have been?

I should say a very strange one, if this was as you say.

Can we deny that a warrior should have a knowledge of arithmetic?

Certainly he should, if he is to have the smallest understanding
of military tactics, or indeed, I should rather say, if he
is to be a man at all.

I should like to know whether you have the same notion which I
have of this study?

What is your notion?

It appears to me to be a study of the kind which we are seeking,
and which leads naturally to reflection, but never to have been
rightly used; for the true use of it is simply to draw the soul
towards being.

Will you explain your meaning? he said.

I will try, I said; and I wish you would share the enquiry with me,
and say `yes' or `no' when I attempt to distinguish in my own mind
what branches of knowledge have this attracting power, in order
that we may have clearer proof that arithmetic is, as I suspect,
one of them.

Explain, he said.

I mean to say that objects of sense are of two kinds; some of them
do not invite thought because the sense is an adequate judge of them;
while in the case of other objects sense is so untrustworthy that
further enquiry is imperatively demanded.

You are clearly referring, he said, to the manner in which the senses
are imposed upon by distance, and by painting in light and shade.

No, I said, that is not at all my meaning.

Then what is your meaning?

When speaking of uninviting objects, I mean those which do not pass
from one sensation to the opposite; inviting objects are those which do;
in this latter case the sense coming upon the object, whether at a
distance or near, gives no more vivid idea of anything in particular
than of its opposite.  An illustration will make my meaning clearer:--
here are three fingers--a little finger, a second finger,
and a middle finger.

Very good.

You may suppose that they are seen quite close:  And here comes
the point.

What is it?

Each of them equally appears a finger, whether seen in the middle
or at the extremity, whether white or black, or thick or thin--
it makes no difference; a finger is a finger all the same. 
In these cases a man is not compelled to ask of thought the question,
what is a finger? for the sight never intimates to the mind that a finger
is other than a finger.

True.

And therefore, I said, as we might expect, there is nothing here
which invites or excites intelligence.

There is not, he said.

But is this equally true of the greatness and smallness of the fingers? 
Can sight adequately perceive them? and is no difference made by the
circumstance that one of the fingers is in the middle and another at
the extremity?  And in like manner does the touch adequately perceive
the qualities of thickness or thinness, or softness or hardness? 
And so of the other senses; do they give perfect intimations
of such matters?  Is not their mode of operation on this wise--
the sense which is concerned with the quality of hardness is
necessarily concerned also with the quality of softness, and only
intimates to the soul that the same thing is felt to be both hard
and soft?

You are quite right, he said.

And must not the soul be perplexed at this intimation which the sense
gives of a hard which is also soft?  What, again, is the meaning
of light and heavy, if that which is light is also heavy,
and that which is heavy, light?

Yes, he said, these intimations which the soul receives
are very curious and require to be explained.

Yes, I said, and in these perplexities the soul naturally summons
to her aid calculation and intelligence, that she may see whether
the several objects announced to her are one or two.

True.

And if they turn out to be two, is not each of them one and different?

Certainly.

And if each is one, and both are two, she will conceive the two
as in a state of division, for if there were undivided they could
only be conceived of as one?

True.

The eye certainly did see both small and great, but only
in a confused manner; they were not distinguished.

Yes.

Whereas the thinking mind, intending to light up the chaos,
was compelled to reverse the process, and look at small and great
as separate and not confused.

Very true.

Was not this the beginning of the enquiry `What is great?'
and `What is small?'

Exactly so.

And thus arose the distinction of the visible and the intelligible.

Most true.

This was what I meant when I spoke of impressions which invited
the intellect, or the reverse--those which are simultaneous with
opposite impressions, invite thought; those which are not simultaneous do not.

I understand, he said, and agree with you.

And to which class do unity and number belong?

I do not know, he replied.

Think a little and you will see that what has preceded will supply
the answer; for if simple unity could be adequately perceived by
the sight or by any other sense, then, as we were saying in the case
of the finger, there would be nothing to attract towards being;
but when there is some contradiction always present, and one is
the reverse of one and involves the conception of plurality,
then thought begins to be aroused within us, and the soul perplexed
and wanting to arrive at a decision asks `What is absolute unity?' 
This is the way in which the study of the one has a power of drawing
and converting the mind to the contemplation of true being.

And surely, he said, this occurs notably in the case of one;
for we see the same thing to be both one and infinite in multitude?

Yes, I said; and this being true of one must be equally true
of all number?

Certainly.

And all arithmetic and calculation have to do with number?

Yes.

And they appear to lead the mind towards truth?

Yes, in a very remarkable manner.

Then this is knowledge of the kind for which we are seeking,
having a double use, military and philosophical; for the man of war
must learn the art of number or he will not know how to array
his troops, and the philosopher also, because he has to rise out
of the sea of change and lay hold of true being, and therefore
he must be an arithmetician.

That is true.

And our guardian is both warrior and philosopher?

Certainly.

Then this is a kind of knowledge which legislation may fitly prescribe;
and we must endeavour to persuade those who are prescribe
to be the principal men of our State to go and learn arithmetic,
not as amateurs, but they must carry on the study until they
see the nature of numbers with the mind only; nor again,
like merchants or retail-traders, with a view to buying or selling,
but for the sake of their military use, and of the soul herself;
and because this will be the easiest way for her to pass from becoming
to truth and being.

That is excellent, he said.

Yes, I said, and now having spoken of it, I must add how charming
the science is! and in how many ways it conduces to our desired end,
if pursued in the spirit of a philosopher, and not of a shopkeeper!

How do you mean?

I mean, as I was saying, that arithmetic has a very great and
elevating effect, compelling the soul to reason about abstract number,
and rebelling against the introduction of visible or tangible
objects into the argument.  You know how steadily the masters of
the art repel and ridicule any one who attempts to divide absolute
unity when he is calculating, and if you divide, they multiply,
taking care that one shall continue one and not become lost in fractions.

That is very true.

Now, suppose a person were to say to them:  O my friends, what are
these wonderful numbers about which you are reasoning, in which,
as you say, there is a unity such as you demand, and each unit
is equal, invariable, indivisible,--what would they answer?

They would answer, as I should conceive, that they were speaking
of those numbers which can only be realised in thought.

Then you see that this knowledge may be truly called necessary,
necessitating as it clearly does the use of the pure intelligence
in the attainment of pure truth?

Yes; that is a marked characteristic of it.

And have you further observed, that those who have a natural talent
for calculation are generally quick at every other kind of knowledge;
and even the dull if they have had an arithmetical training,
although they may derive no other advantage from it, always become much
quicker than they would otherwise have been.

Very true, he said.

And indeed, you will not easily find a more difficult study,
and not many as difficult.

You will not.

And, for all these reasons, arithmetic is a kind of knowledge in
which the best natures should be trained, and which must not be given up.

I agree.

Let this then be made one of our subjects of education.  And next,
shall we enquire whether the kindred science also concerns us?

You mean geometry?

Exactly so.

Clearly, he said, we are concerned with that part of geometry which
relates to war; for in pitching a camp, or taking up a position,
or closing or extending the lines of an army, or any other
military manoeuvre, whether in actual battle or on a march, it will
make all the difference whether a general is or is not a geometrician.

Yes, I said, but for that purpose a very little of either geometry
or calculation will be enough; the question relates rather to
the greater and more advanced part of geometry--whether that tends
in any degree to make more easy the vision of the idea of good;
and thither, as I was saying, all things tend which compel the soul
to turn her gaze towards that place, where is the full perfection
of being, which she ought, by all means, to behold.

True, he said.

Then if geometry compels us to view being, it concerns us;
if becoming only, it does not concern us?

Yes, that is what we assert.

Yet anybody who has the least acquaintance with geometry will not
deny that such a conception of the science is in flat contradiction
to the ordinary language of geometricians.

How so?

They have in view practice only, and are always speaking? in a narrow
and ridiculous manner, of squaring and extending and applying and the like--
they confuse the necessities of geometry with those of daily life;
whereas knowledge is the real object of the whole science.

Certainly, he said.

Then must not a further admission be made?

What admission?

That the knowledge at which geometry aims is knowledge of the eternal,
and not of aught perishing and transient.

That, he replied, may be readily allowed, and is true.

Then, my noble friend, geometry will draw the soul towards truth,
and create the spirit of philosophy, and raise up that which is now
unhappily allowed to fall down.

Nothing will be more likely to have such an effect.

Then nothing should be more sternly laid down than that the
inhabitants of your fair city should by all means learn geometry. 
Moreover the science has indirect effects, which are not small.

Of what kind? he said.

There are the military advantages of which you spoke, I said;
and in all departments of knowledge, as experience proves, any one
who has studied geometry is infinitely quicker of apprehension than
one who has not.

Yes indeed, he said, there is an infinite difference between them.

Then shall we propose this as a second branch of knowledge
which our youth will study?

Let us do so, he replied.

And suppose we make astronomy the third--what do you say?

I am strongly inclined to it, he said; the observation of the seasons
and of months and years is as essential to the general as it
is to the farmer or sailor.

I am amused, I said, at your fear of the world, which makes you
guard against the appearance of insisting upon useless studies;
and I quite admit the difficulty of believing that in every man there
is an eye of the soul which, when by other pursuits lost and dimmed,
is by these purified and re-illumined; and is more precious far
than ten thousand bodily eyes, for by it alone is truth seen. 
Now there are two classes of persons:  one class of those who
will agree with you and will take your words as a revelation;
another class to whom they will be utterly unmeaning, and who will
naturally deem them to be idle tales, for they see no sort of profit
which is to be obtained from them.  And therefore you had better
decide at once with which of the two you are proposing to argue. 
You will very likely say with neither, and that your chief
aim in carrying on the argument is your own improvement;
at the same time you do not grudge to others any benefit which they
may receive.

I think that I should prefer to carry on the argument mainly
on my own behalf.

Then take a step backward, for we have gone wrong in the order
of the sciences.

What was the mistake? he said.

After plane geometry, I said, we proceeded at once to solids
in revolution, instead of taking solids in themselves;
whereas after the second dimension the third, which is concerned
with cubes and dimensions of depth, ought to have followed.

That is true, Socrates; but so little seems to be known as yet
about these subjects.

Why, yes, I said, and for two reasons:--in the first place,
no government patronises them; this leads to a want of energy
in the pursuit of them, and they are difficult; in the second place,
students cannot learn them unless they have a director. 
But then a director can hardly be found, and even if he could,
as matters now stand, the students, who are very conceited, would not
attend to him.  That, however, would be otherwise if the whole
State became the director of these studies and gave honour to them;
then disciples would want to come, and there would be continuous
and earnest search, and discoveries would be made; since even now,
disregarded as they are by the world, and maimed of their fair proportions,
and although none of their votaries can tell the use of them,
still these studies force their way by their natural charm,
and very likely, if they had the help of the State, they would some day
emerge into light.

Yes, he said, there is a remarkable charm in them. 
But I do not clearly understand the change in the order. 
First you began with a geometry of plane surfaces?

Yes, I said.

And you placed astronomy next, and then you made a step backward?

Yes, and I have delayed you by my hurry; the ludicrous state
of solid geometry, which, in natural order, should have followed,
made me pass over this branch and go on to astronomy, or motion
of solids.

True, he said.

Then assuming that the science now omitted would come into
existence if encouraged by the State, let us go on to astronomy,
which will be fourth.

The right order, he replied.  And now, Socrates, as you rebuked
the vulgar manner in which I praised astronomy before, my praise
shall be given in your own spirit.  For every one, as I think,
must see that astronomy compels the soul to look upwards and leads us
from this world to another.

Every one but myself, I said; to every one else this may be clear,
but not to me.

And what then would you say?

I should rather say that those who elevate astronomy into philosophy
appear to me to make us look downwards and not upwards.

What do you mean? he asked.

You, I replied, have in your mind a truly sublime conception of our
knowledge of the things above.  And I dare say that if a person
were to throw his head back and study the fretted ceiling, you would
still think that his mind was the percipient, and not his eyes. 
And you are very likely right, and I may be a simpleton: 
but, in my opinion, that knowledge only which is of being and of
the unseen can make the soul look upwards, and whether a man gapes
at the heavens or blinks on the ground, seeking to learn some
particular of sense, I would deny that he can learn, for nothing
of that sort is matter of science; his soul is looking downwards,
not upwards, whether his way to knowledge is by water or by land,
whether he floats, or only lies on his back.

I acknowledge, he said, the justice of your rebuke.  Still, I should
like to ascertain how astronomy can be learned in any manner
more conducive to that knowledge of which we are speaking?

I will tell you, I said:  The starry heaven which we behold is wrought
upon a visible ground, and therefore, although the fairest and most
perfect of visible things, must necessarily be deemed inferior far
to the true motions of absolute swiftness and absolute slowness,
which are relative to each other, and carry with them that which is
contained in them, in the true number and in every true figure. 
Now, these are to be apprehended by reason and intelligence,
but not by sight.

True, he replied.

The spangled heavens should be used as a pattern and with a view
to that higher knowledge; their beauty is like the beauty of
figures or pictures excellently wrought by the hand of Daedalus,
or some other great artist, which we may chance to behold;
any geometrician who saw them would appreciate the exquisiteness
of their workmanship, but he would never dream of thinking
that in them he could find the true equal or the true double,
or the truth of any other proportion.

No, he replied, such an idea would be ridiculous.

And will not a true astronomer have the same feeling when he looks at
the movements of the stars?  Will he not think that heaven and the things
in heaven are framed by the Creator of them in the most perfect manner? 
But he will never imagine that the proportions of night and day,
or of both to the month, or of the month to the year, or of the stars
to these and to one another, and any other things that are material
and visible can also be eternal and subject to no deviation--
that would be absurd; and it is equally absurd to take so much pains
in investigating their exact truth.

I quite agree, though I never thought of this before.

Then, I said, in astronomy, as in geometry, we should employ problems,
and let the heavens alone if we would approach the subject in the right
way and so make the natural gift of reason to be of any real use.

That, he said, is a work infinitely beyond our present astronomers.

Yes, I said; and there are many other things which must also have a similar
extension given to them, if our legislation is to be of any value. 
But can you tell me of any other suitable study?

No, he said, not without thinking.

Motion, I said, has many forms, and not one only; two of them are
obvious enough even to wits no better than ours; and there are others,
as I imagine, which may be left to wiser persons.

But where are the two?

There is a second, I said, which is the counterpart of the one
already named.

And what may that be?

The second, I said, would seem relatively to the ears to be what
the first is to the eyes; for I conceive that as the eyes are designed
to look up at the stars, so are the ears to hear harmonious motions;
and these are sister sciences--as the Pythagoreans say,
and we, Glaucon, agree with them?

Yes, he replied.

But this, I said, is a laborious study, and therefore we had
better go and learn of them; and they will tell us whether there
are any other applications of these sciences.  At the same time,
we must not lose sight of our own higher object.

What is that?

There is a perfection which all knowledge ought to reach,
and which our pupils ought also to attain, and not to fall short of,
as I was saying that they did in astronomy.  For in the science
of harmony, as you probably know, the same thing happens. 
The teachers of harmony compare the sounds and consonances which
are heard only, and their labour, like that of the astronomers,
is in vain.

Yes, by heaven! he said; and 'tis as good as a play to hear
them talking about their condensed notes, as they call them;
they put their ears close alongside of the strings like persons
catching a sound from their neighbour's wall--one set of them
declaring that they distinguish an intermediate note and have
found the least interval which should be the unit of measurement;
the others insisting that the two sounds have passed into the same--
either party setting their ears before their understanding.

You mean, I said, those gentlemen who tease and torture the strings
and rack them on the pegs of the instrument:  might carry on the metaphor
and speak after their manner of the blows which the plectrum gives,
and make accusations against the strings, both of backwardness
and forwardness to sound; but this would be tedious, and therefore
I will only say that these are not the men, and that I am referring
to the Pythagoreans, of whom I was just now proposing to enquire
about harmony.  For they too are in error, like the astronomers;
they investigate the numbers of the harmonies which are heard,
but they never attain to problems-that is to say, they never reach
the natural harmonies of number, or reflect why some numbers are
harmonious and others not.

That, he said, is a thing of more than mortal knowledge.

A thing, I replied, which I would rather call useful; that is,
if sought after with a view to the beautiful and good; but if pursued
in any other spirit, useless.  Very true, he said.

Now, when all these studies reach the point of inter-communion
and connection with one another, and come to be considered
in their mutual affinities, then, I think, but not till then,
will the pursuit of them have a value for our objects;
otherwise there is no profit in them.

I suspect so; but you are speaking, Socrates, of a vast work.

What do you mean?  I said; the prelude or what?  Do you not know
that all this is but the prelude to the actual strain which we
have to learn?  For you surely would not regard the skilled
mathematician as a dialectician?

Assuredly not, he said; I have hardly ever known a mathematician
who was capable of reasoning.

But do you imagine that men who are unable to give and take a reason
will have the knowledge which we require of them?

Neither can this be supposed.

And so, Glaucon, I said, we have at last arrived at the hymn
of dialectic.  This is that strain which is of the intellect only,
but which the faculty of sight will nevertheless be found to imitate;
for sight, as you may remember, was imagined by us after a while to
behold the real animals and stars, and last of all the sun himself. 
And so with dialectic; when a person starts on the discovery of
the absolute by the light of reason only, and without any assistance
of sense, and perseveres until by pure intelligence he arrives
at the perception of the absolute good, he at last finds himself at
the end of the intellectual world, as in the case of sight at the end
of the visible.

Exactly, he said.

Then this is the progress which you call dialectic?

True.

But the release of the prisoners from chains, and their translation
from the shadows to the images and to the light, and the ascent
from the underground den to the sun, while in his presence they are
vainly trying to look on animals and plants and the light of the sun,
but are able to perceive even with their weak eyes the images in
the water (which are divine), and are the shadows of true existence
(not shadows of images cast by a light of fire, which compared
with the sun is only an image)--this power of elevating the highest
principle in the soul to the contemplation of that which is best
in existence, with which we may compare the raising of that faculty
which is the very light of the body to the sight of that which is
brightest in the material and visible world--this power is given,
as I was saying, by all that study and pursuit of the arts which has
been described.

I agree in what you are saying, he replied, which may be hard
to believe, yet, from another point of view, is harder still to deny. 
This, however, is not a theme to be treated of in passing only,
but will have to be discussed again and again.  And so,
whether our conclusion be true or false, let us assume all this,
and proceed at once from the prelude or preamble to the chief strain,
and describe that in like manner.  Say, then, what is the nature
and what are the divisions of dialectic, and what are the paths
which lead thither; for these paths will also lead to our final rest?

Dear Glaucon, I said, you will not be able to follow me here,
though I would do my best, and you should behold not an image only
but the absolute truth, according to my notion.  Whether what I told
you would or would not have been a reality I cannot venture to say;
but you would have seen something like reality; of that I am confident.

Doubtless, he replied.

But I must also remind you, that the power of dialectic alone can
reveal this, and only to one who is a disciple of the previous sciences.

Of that assertion you may be as confident as of the last.

And assuredly no one will argue that there is any other method
of comprehending by any regular process all true existence or of
ascertaining what each thing is in its own nature; for the arts
in general are concerned with the desires or opinions of men,
or are cultivated with a view to production and construction,
or for the preservation of such productions and constructions;
and as to the mathematical sciences which, as we were saying,
have some apprehension of true being--geometry and the like--
they only dream about being, but never can they behold the waking
reality so long as they leave the hypotheses which they use unexamined,
and are unable to give an account of them.  For when a man
knows not his own first principle, and when the conclusion and
intermediate steps are also constructed out of he knows not what,
how can he imagine that such a fabric of convention can ever
become science?

Impossible, he said.

Then dialectic, and dialectic alone, goes directly to the first
principle and is the only science which does away with hypotheses
in order to make her ground secure; the eye of the soul, which is
literally buried in an outlandish slough, is by her gentle aid
lifted upwards; and she uses as handmaids and helpers in the work
of conversion, the sciences which we have been discussing. 
Custom terms them sciences, but they ought to have some other name,
implying greater clearness than opinion and less clearness than science: 
and this, in our previous sketch, was called understanding. 
But why should we dispute about names when we have realities of such
importance to consider?

Why indeed, he said, when any name will do which expresses
the thought of the mind with clearness?

At any rate, we are satisfied, as before, to have four divisions;
two for intellect and two for opinion, and to call the first
division science, the second understanding, the third belief,
and the fourth perception of shadows, opinion being concerned
with becoming, and intellect with being; and so to make a proportion:--

          As being is to becoming, so is pure intellect to opinion.
          And as intellect is to opinion, so is science to belief, and
          understanding to the perception of shadows.

But let us defer the further correlation and subdivision of the
subjects of opinion and of intellect, for it will be a long enquiry,
many times longer than this has been.

As far as I understand, he said, I agree.

And do you also agree, I said, in describing the dialectician
as one who attains a conception of the essence of each thing? 
And he who does not possess and is therefore unable to impart
this conception, in whatever degree he fails, may in that degree
also be said to fail in intelligence?  Will you admit so much?

Yes, he said; how can I deny it?

And you would say the same of the conception of the good?

Until the person is able to abstract and define rationally the idea
of good, and unless he can run the gauntlet of all objections,
and is ready to disprove them, not by appeals to opinion,
but to absolute truth, never faltering at any step of the argument--
unless he can do all this, you would say that he knows neither
the idea of good nor any other good; he apprehends only a shadow,
if anything at all, which is given by opinion and not by science;--
dreaming and slumbering in this life, before he is well awake here,
he arrives at the world below, and has his final quietus.

In all that I should most certainly agree with you.

And surely you would not have the children of your ideal State,
whom you are nurturing and educating--if the ideal ever becomes
a reality--you would not allow the future rulers to be like posts,
having no reason in them, and yet to be set in authority over
the highest matters?

Certainly not.

Then you will make a law that they shall have such an education
as will enable them to attain the greatest skill in asking
and answering questions?

Yes, he said, you and I together will make it.

Dialectic, then, as you will agree, is the coping-stone of the sciences,
and is set over them; no other science can be placed higher--
the nature of knowledge can no further go?

I agree, he said.

But to whom we are to assign these studies, and in what way they
are to be assigned, are questions which remain to be considered?

Yes, clearly.

You remember, I said, how the rulers were chosen before?

Certainly, he said.

The same natures must still be chosen, and the preference
again given to the surest and the bravest, and, if possible,
to the fairest; and, having noble and generous tempers, they should
also have the natural gifts which will facilitate their education.

And what are these?

Such gifts as keenness and ready powers of acquisition;
for the mind more often faints from the severity of study than from
the severity of gymnastics:  the toil is more entirely the mind's own,
and is not shared with the body.

Very true, he replied.

Further, he of whom we are in search should have a good memory,
and be an unwearied solid man who is a lover of labour in any line;
or he will never be able to endure the great amount of bodily exercise
and to go through all the intellectual discipline and study which we
require of him.

Certainly, he said; he must have natural gifts.

The mistake at present is, that those who study philosophy have
no vocation, and this, as I was before saying, is the reason
why she has fallen into disrepute:  her true sons should take
her by the hand and not bastards.

What do you mean?

In the first place, her votary should not have a lame or halting industry--
I mean, that he should not be half industrious and half idle: 
as, for example, when a man is a lover of gymnastic and hunting,
and all other bodily exercises, but a hater rather than a lover
of the labour of learning or listening or enquiring.  Or the
occupation to which he devotes himself may be of an opposite kind,
and he may have the other sort of lameness.

Certainly, he said.

And as to truth, I said, is not a soul equally to be deemed
halt and lame which hates voluntary falsehood and is extremely
indignant at herself and others when they tell lies, but is patient
of involuntary falsehood, and does not mind wallowing like a swinish
beast in the mire of ignorance, and has no shame at being detected?

To be sure.

And, again, in respect of temperance, courage, magnificence, and every
other virtue, should we not carefully distinguish between the true
son and the bastard? for where there is no discernment of such
qualities States and individuals unconsciously err and the State makes
a ruler, and the individual a friend, of one who, being defective
in some part of virtue, is in a figure lame or a bastard.

That is very true, he said.

All these things, then, will have to be carefully considered by us;
and if only those whom we introduce to this vast system of education
and training are sound in body and mind, justice herself will have nothing
to say against us, and we shall be the saviours of the constitution
and of the State; but, if our pupils are men of another stamp,
the reverse will happen, and we shall pour a still greater flood
of ridicule on philosophy than she has to endure at present.

That would not be creditable.

Certainly not, I said; and yet perhaps, in thus turning jest
into earnest I am equally ridiculous.

In what respect?

I had forgotten, I said, that we were not serious, and spoke with too
much excitement.  For when I saw philosophy so undeservedly trampled
under foot of men I could not help feeling a sort of indignation
at the authors of her disgrace:  and my anger made me too vehement.

Indeed!  I was listening, and did not think so.

But I, who am the speaker, felt that I was.  And now let me remind
you that, although in our former selection we chose old men,
we must not do so in this.  Solon was under a delusion when he
said that a man when he grows old may learn many things--for he
can no more learn much than he can run much; youth is the time
for any extraordinary toil.

Of course.

And, therefore, calculation and geometry and all the other elements
of instruction, which are a preparation for dialectic, should be
presented to the mind in childhood; not, however, under any notion
of forcing our system of education.

Why not?

Because a freeman ought not to be a slave in the acquisition
of knowledge of any kind.  Bodily exercise, when compulsory,
does no harm to the body; but knowledge which is acquired under
compulsion obtains no hold on the mind.

Very true.

Then, my good friend, I said, do not use compulsion, but let early
education be a sort of amusement; you will then be better able
to find out the natural bent.

That is a very rational notion, he said.

Do you remember that the children, too, were to be taken to see
the battle on horseback; and that if there were no danger they
were to be brought close up and, like young hounds, have a taste
of blood given them?

Yes, I remember.

The same practice may be followed, I said, in all these things--
labours, lessons, dangers--and he who is most at home in all
of them ought to be enrolled in a select number.

At what age?

At the age when the necessary gymnastics are over:  the period whether
of two or three years which passes in this sort of training is useless
for any other purpose; for sleep and exercise are unpropitious
to learning; and the trial of who is first in gymnastic exercises
is one of the most important tests to which our youth are subjected.

Certainly, he replied.

After that time those who are selected from the class of twenty
years old will be promoted to higher honour, and the sciences
which they learned without any order in their early education will
now be brought together, and they will be able to see the natural
relationship of them to one another and to true being.

Yes, he said, that is the only kind of knowledge which takes
lasting root.

Yes, I said; and the capacity for such knowledge is the great
criterion of dialectical talent:  the comprehensive mind is always
the dialectical.

I agree with you, he said.

These, I said, are the points which you must consider; and those
who have most of this comprehension, and who are more steadfast
in their learning, and in their military and other appointed duties,
when they have arrived at the age of thirty have to be chosen
by you out of the select class, and elevated to higher honour;
and you will have to prove them by the help of dialectic, in order
to learn which of them is able to give up the use of sight and the
other senses, and in company with truth to attain absolute being: 
And here, my friend, great caution is required.

Why great caution?

Do you not remark, I said, how great is the evil which dialectic
has introduced?

What evil? he said.

The students of the art are filled with lawlessness.

Quite true, he said.

Do you think that there is anything so very unnatural or inexcusable
in their case? or will you make allowance for them?

In what way make allowance?

I want you, I said, by way of parallel, to imagine a supposititious
son who is brought up in great wealth; he is one of a great
and numerous family, and has many flatterers.  When he grows up
to manhood, he learns that his alleged are not his real parents;
but who the real are he is unable to discover.  Can you guess
how he will be likely to behave towards his flatterers and his
supposed parents, first of all during the period when he is
ignorant of the false relation, and then again when he knows? 
Or shall I guess for you?

If you please.

Then I should say, that while he is ignorant of the truth he will
be likely to honour his father and his mother and his supposed
relations more than the flatterers; he will be less inclined to
neglect them when in need, or to do or say anything against them;
and he will be less willing to disobey them in any important matter.

He will.

But when he has made the discovery, I should imagine that he would
diminish his honour and regard for them, and would become more devoted
to the flatterers; their influence over him would greatly increase;
he would now live after their ways, and openly associate with them,
and, unless he were of an unusually good disposition, he would
trouble himself no more about his supposed parents or other relations.

Well, all that is very probable.  But how is the image applicable
to the disciples of philosophy?

In this way:  you know that there are certain principles about justice
and honour, which were taught us in childhood, and under their
parental authority we have been brought up, obeying and honouring them.

That is true.

There are also opposite maxims and habits of pleasure which flatter
and attract the soul, but do not influence those of us who have any
sense of right, and they continue to obey and honour the maxims
of their fathers.

True.

Now, when a man is in this state, and the questioning spirit asks
what is fair or honourable, and he answers as the legislator has
taught him, and then arguments many and diverse refute his words,
until he is driven into believing that nothing is honourable any
more than dishonourable, or just and good any more than the reverse,
and so of all the notions which he most valued, do you think that he
will still honour and obey them as before?

Impossible.

And when he ceases to think them honourable and natural as heretofore,
and he fails to discover the true, can he be expected to pursue
any life other than that which flatters his desires?

He cannot.

And from being a keeper of the law he is converted into a breaker
of it?

Unquestionably.

Now all this is very natural in students of philosophy such as I
have described, and also, as I was just now saying, most excusable.

Yes, he said; and, I may add, pitiable.

Therefore, that your feelings may not be moved to pity about our
citizens who are now thirty years of age, every care must be taken
in introducing them to dialectic.

Certainly.

There is a danger lest they should taste the dear delight too early;
for youngsters, as you may have observed, when they first get
the taste in their mouths, argue for amusement, and are always
contradicting and refuting others in imitation of those who refute them;
like puppy-dogs, they rejoice in pulling and tearing at all who come
near them.

Yes, he said, there is nothing which they like better.

And when they have made many conquests and received defeats
at the hands of many, they violently and speedily get into a way
of not believing anything which they believed before, and hence,
not only they, but philosophy and all that relates to it is apt
to have a bad name with the rest of the world.

Too true, he said.

But when a man begins to get older, he will no longer be guilty of
such insanity; he will imitate the dialectician who is seeking for truth,
and not the eristic, who is contradicting for the sake of amusement;
and the greater moderation of his character will increase instead
of diminishing the honour of the pursuit.

Very true, he said.

And did we not make special provision for this, when we said
that the disciples of philosophy were to be orderly and steadfast,
not, as now, any chance aspirant or intruder?

Very true.

Suppose, I said, the study of philosophy to take the place of gymnastics
and to be continued diligently and earnestly and exclusively
for twice the number of years which were passed in bodily exercise--
will that be enough?

Would you say six or four years? he asked.

Say five years, I replied; at the end of the time they must
be sent down again into the den and compelled to hold any
military or other office which young men are qualified to hold: 
in this way they will get their experience of life, and there
will be an opportunity of trying whether, when they are drawn
all manner of ways by temptation, they will stand firm or flinch.

And how long is this stage of their lives to last?

Fifteen years, I answered; and when they have reached fifty years
of age, then let those who still survive and have distinguished
themselves in every action of their lives and in every branch
of knowledge come at last to their consummation; the time has now
arrived at which they must raise the eye of the soul to the universal
light which lightens all things, and behold the absolute good;
for that is the, pattern according to which they are to order the State
and the lives of individuals, and the remainder of their own lives also;
making philosophy their chief pursuit, but, when their turn comes,
toiling also at politics and ruling for the public good, not as though
they were performing some heroic action, but simply as a matter of duty;
and when they have brought up in each generation others like
themselves and left them in their place to be governors of the State,
then they will depart to the Islands of the Blest and dwell there;
and the city will give them public memorials and sacrifices and
honour them, if the Pythian oracle consent, as demi-gods, but if not,
as in any case blessed and divine.

You are a sculptor, Socrates, and have made statues of our governors
faultless in beauty.

Yes, I said, Glaucon, and of our governesses too;
for you must not suppose that what I have been
saying applies to men only and not to women as far as their natures can go.

There you are right, he said, since we have made them to share
in all things like the men.

Well, I said, and you would agree (would you not?) that what has
been said about the State and the government is not a mere dream,
and although difficult not impossible, but only possible in the way
which has been supposed; that is to say, when the true philosopher
kings are born in a State, one or more of them, despising the
honours of this present world which they deem mean and worthless,
esteeming above all things right and the honour that springs from right,
and regarding justice as the greatest and most necessary of all things,
whose ministers they are, and whose principles will be exalted
by them when they set in order their own city?

How will they proceed?

They will begin by sending out into the country all the inhabitants
of the city who are more than ten years old, and will take possession
of their children, who will be unaffected by the habits of their parents;
these they will train in their own habits and laws, I mean in the laws
which we have given them:  and in this way the State and constitution
of which we were speaking will soonest and most easily attain happiness,
and the nation which has such a constitution will gain most.

Yes, that will be the best way.  And I think, Socrates, that you
have very well described how, if ever, such a constitution might
come into being.

Enough then of the perfect State, and of the man who bears its image--
there is no difficulty in seeing how we shall describe him.

There is no difficulty, he replied; and I agree with you in thinking
that nothing more need be said.

BOOK VIII

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

AND so, Glaucon, we have arrived at the conclusion that in the
perfect State wives and children are to be in common; and that all
education and the pursuits of war and peace are also to be common,
and the best philosophers and the bravest warriors are to be their kings?

That, replied Glaucon, has been acknowledged.

Yes, I said; and we have further acknowledged that the governors,
when appointed themselves, will take their soldiers and place them
in houses such as we were describing, which are common to all,
and contain nothing private, or individual; and about their property,
you remember what we agreed?

Yes, I remember that no one was to have any of the ordinary possessions
of mankind; they were to be warrior athletes and guardians,
receiving from the other citizens, in lieu of annual payment,
only their maintenance, and they were to take care of themselves
and of the whole State.

True, I said; and now that this division of our task is concluded,
let us find the point at which we digressed, that we may return into
the old path.

There is no difficulty in returning; you implied, then as now,
that you had finished the description of the State:  you said
that such a State was good, and that the man was good who
answered to it, although, as now appears, you had more excellent
things to relate both of State and man.  And you said further,
that if this was the true form, then the others were false;
and of the false forms, you said, as I remember, that there
were four principal ones, and that their defects, and the defects
of the individuals corresponding to them, were worth examining. 
When we had seen all the individuals, and finally agreed as to who was
the best and who was the worst of them, we were to consider whether
the best was not also the happiest, and the worst the most miserable. 
I asked you what were the four forms of government of which you spoke,
and then Polemarchus and Adeimantus put in their word; and you
began again, and have found your way to the point at which we have
now arrived.

Your recollection, I said, is most exact.

Then, like a wrestler, he replied, you must put yourself again
in the same position; and let me ask the same questions, and do you
give me the same answer which you were about to give me then.

Yes, if I can, I will, I said.

I shall particularly wish to hear what were the four constitutions
of which you were speaking.

That question, I said, is easily answered:  the four governments
of which I spoke, so far as they have distinct names, are, first,
those of Crete and Sparta, which are generally applauded;
what is termed oligarchy comes next; this is not equally approved,
and is a form of government which teems with evils:  thirdly, democracy,
which naturally follows oligarchy, although very different: 
and lastly comes tyranny, great and famous, which differs from them all,
and is the fourth and worst disorder of a State.  I do not know,
do you? of any other constitution which can be said to have a
distinct character.  There are lordships and principalities which are
bought and sold, and some other intermediate forms of government. 
But these are nondescripts and may be found equally among Hellenes
and among barbarians.

Yes, he replied, we certainly hear of many curious forms of government
which exist among them.

Do you know, I said, that governments vary as the dispositions of men vary,
and that there must be as many of the one as there are of the other? 
For we cannot suppose that States are made of `oak and rock,'
and not out of the human natures which are in them, and which in a
figure turn the scale and draw other things after them?

Yes, he said, the States are as the men are; they grow
out of human characters.

Then if the constitutions of States are five, the dispositions
of individual minds will also be five?

Certainly.

Him who answers to aristocracy, and whom we rightly call just and good,
we have already described.

We have.

Then let us now proceed to describe the inferior sort of natures,
being the contentious and ambitious, who answer to the Spartan polity;
also the oligarchical, democratical, and tyrannical.  Let us place
the most just by the side of the most unjust, and when we see them
we shall be able to compare the relative happiness or unhappiness
of him who leads a life of pure justice or pure injustice. 
The enquiry will then be completed.  And we shall know whether we ought
to pursue injustice, as Thrasymachus advises, or in accordance with
the conclusions of the argument to prefer justice.

Certainly, he replied, we must do as you say.

Shall we follow our old plan, which we adopted with a view to clearness,
of taking the State first and then proceeding to the individual,
and begin with the government of honour?--I know of no name
for such a government other than timocracy, or perhaps timarchy. 
We will compare with this the like character in the individual;
and, after that, consider oligarchical man; and then again we
will turn our attention to democracy and the democratical man;
and lastly, we will go and view the city of tyranny, and once
more take a look into the tyrant's soul, and try to arrive at a
satisfactory decision.

That way of viewing and judging of the matter will be very suitable.

First, then, I said, let us enquire how timocracy (the government of honour)
arises out of aristocracy (the government of the best). Clearly,
all political changes originate in divisions of the actual governing power;
a government which is united, however small, cannot be moved.

Very true, he said.

In what way, then, will our city be moved, and in what manner
the two classes of auxiliaries and rulers disagree among themselves
or with one another?  Shall we, after the manner of Homer, pray the
Muses to tell us `how discord first arose'? Shall we imagine them
in solemn mockery, to play and jest with us as if we were children,
and to address us in a lofty tragic vein, making believe to be in earnest?

How would they address us?

After this manner:--A city which is thus constituted can hardly
be shaken; but, seeing that everything which has a beginning has
also an end, even a constitution such as yours will not last for ever,
but will in time be dissolved.  And this is the dissolution:--
In plants that grow in the earth, as well as in animals that move
on the earth's surface, fertility and sterility of soul and body
occur when the circumferences of the circles of each are completed,
which in short-lived existences pass over a short space,
and in long-lived ones over a long space.  But to the knowledge
of human fecundity and sterility all the wisdom and education
of your rulers will not attain; the laws which regulate them will
not be discovered by an intelligence which is alloyed with sense,
but will escape them, and they will bring children into the world
when they ought not.  Now that which is of divine birth has a period
which is contained in a perfect number, but the period of human birth
is comprehended in a number in which first increments by involution
and evolution (or squared and cubed) obtaining three intervals
and four terms of like and unlike, waxing and waning numbers,
make all the terms commensurable and agreeable to one another. 
The base of these (3) with a third added (4) when combined with five
(20) and raised to the third power furnishes two harmonies;
the first a square which is a hundred times as great (400 = 4 X
100), and the other a figure having one side equal to the former,
but oblong, consisting of a hundred numbers squared upon rational
diameters of a square (i. e.  omitting fractions), the side of which
is five (7 X 7 = 49 X 100 = 4900), each of them being less by one
(than the perfect square which includes the fractions, sc.  50) or less
by two perfect squares of irrational diameters (of a square the side
of which is five = 50 + 50 = 100); and a hundred cubes of three
(27 X 100 = 2700 + 4900 + 400 = 8000). Now this number represents
a geometrical figure which has control over the good and evil of births. 
For when your guardians are ignorant of the law of births,
and unite bride and bridegroom out of season, the children will not
be goodly or fortunate.  And though only the best of them will be
appointed by their predecessors, still they will be unworthy to hold
their fathers' places, and when they come into power as guardians,
they will soon be found to fall in taking care of us, the Muses,
first by under-valuing music; which neglect will soon extend to gymnastic;
and hence the young men of your State will be less cultivated. 
In the succeeding generation rulers will be appointed who have lost
the guardian power of testing the metal of your different races,
which, like Hesiod's, are of gold and silver and brass and iron. 
And so iron will be mingled with silver, and brass with gold,
and hence there will arise dissimilarity and inequality and irregularity,
which always and in all places are causes of hatred and war. 
This the Muses affirm to be the stock from which discord has sprung,
wherever arising; and this is their answer to us.

Yes, and we may assume that they answer truly.

Why, yes, I said, of course they answer truly; how can the Muses
speak falsely?

And what do the Muses say next?

When discord arose, then the two races were drawn different ways: 
the iron and brass fell to acquiring money and land and houses
and gold and silver; but the gold and silver races, not wanting money
but having the true riches in their own nature, inclined towards virtue
and the ancient order of things.  There was a battle between them,
and at last they agreed to distribute their land and houses among
individual owners; and they enslaved their friends and maintainers,
whom they had formerly protected in the condition of freemen,
and made of them subjects and servants; and they themselves were
engaged in war and in keeping a watch against them.

I believe that you have rightly conceived the origin of the change.

And the new government which thus arises will be of a form
intermediate between oligarchy and aristocracy?

Very true.

Such will be the change, and after the change has been made,
how will they proceed?  Clearly, the new State, being in a mean
between oligarchy and the perfect State, will partly follow one
and partly the other, and will also have some peculiarities.

True, he said.

In the honour given to rulers, in the abstinence of the warrior
class from agriculture, handicrafts, and trade in general,
in the institution of common meals, and in the attention paid
to gymnastics and military training--in all these respects this
State will resemble the former.

True.

But in the fear of admitting philosophers to power, because they are no
longer to be had simple and earnest, but are made up of mixed elements;
and in turning from them to passionate and less complex characters,
who are by nature fitted for war rather than peace; and in the value set
by them upon military stratagems and contrivances, and in the waging
of everlasting wars--this State will be for the most part peculiar.

Yes.

Yes, I said; and men of this stamp will be covetous of money,
like those who live in oligarchies; they will have, a fierce secret
longing after gold and silver, which they will hoard in dark places,
having magazines and treasuries of their own for the deposit and
concealment of them; also castles which are just nests for their eggs,
and in which they will spend large sums on their wives, or on any
others whom they please.

That is most true, he said.

And they are miserly because they have no means of openly acquiring
the money which they prize; they will spend that which is another
man's on the gratification of their desires, stealing their pleasures
and running away like children from the law, their father: 
they have been schooled not by gentle influences but by force,
for they have neglected her who is the true Muse, the companion of
reason and philosophy, and have honoured gymnastic more than music.

Undoubtedly, he said, the form of government which you describe
is a mixture of good and evil.

Why, there is a mixture, I said; but one thing, and one thing only,
is predominantly seen,--the spirit of contention and ambition;
and these are due to the prevalence of the passionate or spirited element.

Assuredly, he said.

Such is the origin and such the character of this State,
which has been described in outline only; the more perfect
execution was not required, for a sketch is enough to show
the type of the most perfectly just and most perfectly unjust;
and to go through all the States and all the characters of men,
omitting none of them, would be an interminable labour.

Very true, he replied.

Now what man answers to this form of government-how did he come
into being, and what is he like?

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS

I think, said Adeimantus, that in the spirit of contention
which characterises him, he is not unlike our friend Glaucon.

Perhaps, I said, he may be like him in that one point; but there
are other respects in which he is very different.

In what respects?

He should have more of self-assertion and be less cultivated,
and yet a friend of culture; and he should be a good listener,
but no speaker.  Such a person is apt to be rough with slaves,
unlike the educated man, who is too proud for that; and he will
also be courteous to freemen, and remarkably obedient to authority;
he is a lover of power and a lover of honour; claiming to be a ruler,
not because he is eloquent, or on any ground of that sort,
but because he is a soldier and has performed feats of arms;
he is also a lover of gymnastic exercises and of the chase.

Yes, that is the type of character which answers to timocracy.

Such an one will despise riches only when he is young;
but as he gets older he will be more and more attracted to them,
because he has a piece of the avaricious nature in him, and is
not singleminded towards virtue, having lost his best guardian.

Who was that? said Adeimantus.

Philosophy, I said, tempered with music, who comes and takes her abode
in a man, and is the only saviour of his virtue throughout life.

Good, he said.

Such,
I said, is the timocratical youth, and he is like the timocratical State.

Exactly.

His origin is as follows:--He is often the young son of a grave father,
who dwells in an ill-governed city, of which he declines the honours
and offices, and will not go to law, or exert himself in any way,
but is ready to waive his rights in order that he may escape trouble.

And how does the son come into being?

The character of the son begins to develop when he hears his mother
complaining that her husband has no place in the government,
of which the consequence is that she has no precedence among
other women.  Further, when she sees her husband not very eager
about money, and instead of battling and railing in the law
courts or assembly, taking whatever happens to him quietly;
and when she observes that his thoughts always centre in himself,
while he treats her with very considerable indifference, she is annoyed,
and says to her son that his father is only half a man and far
too easy-going: adding all the other complaints about her own
ill-treatment which women are so fond of rehearsing.

Yes, said Adeimantus, they give us plenty of them, and their
complaints are so like themselves.

And you know, I said, that the old servants also, who are supposed to be
attached to the family, from time to time talk privately in the same
strain to the son; and if they see any one who owes money to his father,
or is wronging him in any way, and he falls to prosecute them,
they tell the youth that when he grows up he must retaliate upon
people of this sort, and be more of a man than his father.  He has
only to walk abroad and he hears and sees the same sort of thing: 
those who do their own business in the city are called simpletons,
and held in no esteem, while the busy-bodies are honoured and applauded. 
The result is that the young man, hearing and seeing all these thing--
hearing too, the words of his father, and having a nearer view of his way
of life, and making comparisons of him and others--is drawn opposite ways: 
while his father is watering and nourishing the rational principle
in his soul, the others are encouraging the passionate and appetitive;
and he being not originally of a bad nature, but having kept bad company,
is at last brought by their joint influence to a middle point,
and gives up the kingdom which is within him to the middle
principle of contentiousness and passion, and becomes arrogant
and ambitious.

You seem to me to have described his origin perfectly.

Then we have now, I said, the second form of government and the second
type of character?

We have.

Next, let us look at another man who, as Aeschylus says,

          Is set over against another State;

or rather, as our plan requires, begin with the State.

By all means.

I believe that oligarchy follows next in order.

And what manner of government do you term oligarchy?

A government resting on a valuation of property, in which the rich
have power and the poor man is deprived of it.

I understand, he replied.

Ought I not to begin by describing how the change from timocracy
to oligarchy arises?

Yes.

Well, I said, no eyes are required in order to see how the one
passes into the other.

How?

The accumulation of gold in the treasury of private individuals
is ruin the of timocracy; they invent illegal modes of expenditure;
for what do they or their wives care about the law?

Yes, indeed.

And then one, seeing another grow rich, seeks to rival him,
and thus the great mass of the citizens become lovers of money.

Likely enough.

And so they grow richer and richer, and the more they think
of making a fortune the less they think of virtue; for when riches
and virtue are placed together in the scales of the balance,
the one always rises as the other falls.

True.

And in proportion as riches and rich men are honoured in the State,
virtue and the virtuous are dishonoured.

Clearly.

And what is honoured is cultivated, and that which has no honour
is neglected.

That is obvious.

And so at last, instead of loving contention and glory, men become
lovers of trade and money; they honour and look up to the rich man,
and make a ruler of him, and dishonour the poor man.

They do so.

They next proceed to make a law which fixes a sum of money as
the qualification of citizenship; the sum is higher in one place
and lower in another, as the oligarchy is more or less exclusive;
and they allow no one whose property falls below the amount fixed
to have any share in the government.  These changes in the constitution
they effect by force of arms, if intimidation has not already done
their work.

Very true.

And this, speaking generally, is the way in which oligarchy
is established.

Yes, he said; but what are the characteristics of this form
of government, and what are the defects of which we were speaking?

First of all, I said, consider the nature of the qualification
just think what would happen if pilots were to be chosen according
to their property, and a poor man were refused permission to steer,
even though he were a better pilot?

You mean that they would shipwreck?

Yes; and is not this true of the government of anything?

I should imagine so.

Except a city?--or would you include a city?

Nay, he said, the case of a city is the strongest of all,
inasmuch as the rule of a city is the greatest and most difficult
of all.

This, then, will be the first great defect of oligarchy?

Clearly.

And here is another defect which is quite as bad.

What defect?

The inevitable division:  such a State is not one, but two States,
the one of poor, the other of rich men; and they are living on
the same spot and always conspiring against one another.

That, surely, is at least as bad.

Another discreditable feature is, that, for a like reason,
they are incapable of carrying on any war.  Either they arm
the multitude, and then they are more afraid of them than of
the enemy; or, if they do not call them out in the hour of battle,
they are oligarchs indeed, few to fight as they are few to rule. 
And at the same time their fondness for money makes them unwilling
to pay taxes.

How discreditable!

And, as we said before, under such a constitution the same persons
have too many callings--they are husbandmen, tradesmen, warriors,
all in one.  Does that look well?

Anything but well.

There is another evil which is, perhaps, the greatest of all,
and to which this State first begins to be liable.

What evil?

A man may sell all that he has, and another may acquire his property;
yet after the sale he may dwell in the city of which he is no longer
a part, being neither trader, nor artisan, nor horseman, nor hoplite,
but only a poor, helpless creature.

Yes, that is an evil which also first begins in this State.

The evil is certainly not prevented there; for oligarchies have
both the extremes of great wealth and utter poverty.

True.

But think again:  In his wealthy days, while he was spending
his money, was a man of this sort a whit more good to the State
for the purposes of citizenship?  Or did he only seem to be a member
of the ruling body, although in truth he was neither ruler nor subject,
but just a spendthrift?

As you say, he seemed to be a ruler, but was only a spendthrift.

May we not say that this is the drone in the house who is
like the drone in the honeycomb, and that the one is the plague
of the city as the other is of the hive?

Just so, Socrates.

And God has made the flying drones, Adeimantus, all without stings,
whereas of the walking drones he has made some without stings but others
have dreadful stings; of the stingless class are those who in their
old age end as paupers; of the stingers come all the criminal class,
as they are termed.

Most true, he said.

Clearly then, whenever you see paupers in a State, somewhere in
that neighborhood there are hidden away thieves, and cutpurses
and robbers of temples, and all sorts of malefactors.

Clearly.

Well, I said, and in oligarchical States do you not find paupers?

Yes, he said; nearly everybody is a pauper who is not a ruler.

And may we be so bold as to affirm that there are also many
criminals to be found in them, rogues who have stings, and whom
the authorities are careful to restrain by force?

Certainly, we may be so bold.

The existence of such persons is to be attributed to want of education,
ill-training, and an evil constitution of the State?

True.

Such, then, is the form and such are the evils of oligarchy;
and there may be many other evils.

Very likely.

Then oligarchy, or the form of government in which the rulers
are elected for their wealth, may now be dismissed.  Let us
next proceed to consider the nature and origin of the individual
who answers to this State.

By all means.

Does not the timocratical man change into the oligarchical on this wise?

How?

A time arrives when the representative of timocracy has a son: 
at first he begins by emulating his father and walking in his footsteps,
but presently he sees him of a sudden foundering against the State
as upon a sunken reef, and he and all that he has is lost;
he may have been a general or some other high officer who is brought
to trial under a prejudice raised by informers, and either put to death,
or exiled, or deprived of the privileges of a citizen, and all his
property taken from him.

Nothing more likely.

And the son has seen and known all this--he is a ruined man,
and his fear has taught him to knock ambition and passion head-foremost
from his bosom's throne; humbled by poverty he takes to money-making
and by mean and miserly savings and hard work gets a fortune together. 
Is not such an one likely to seat the concupiscent and covetous
element on the vacant throne and to suffer it to play the great king
within him, girt with tiara and chain and scimitar?

Most true, he replied.

And when he has made reason and spirit sit down on the ground obediently
on either side of their sovereign, and taught them to know their place,
he compels the one to think only of how lesser sums may be turned
into larger ones, and will not allow the other to worship and admire
anything but riches and rich men, or to be ambitious of anything
so much as the acquisition of wealth and the means of acquiring it.

Of all changes, he said, there is none so speedy or so sure
as the conversion of the ambitious youth into the avaricious one.

And the avaricious, I said, is the oligarchical youth?

Yes, he said; at any rate the individual out of whom he came
is like the State out of which oligarchy came.

Let us then consider whether there is any likeness between them.

Very good.

First, then, they resemble one another in the value which they set
upon wealth?

Certainly.

Also in their penurious, laborious character; the individual only
satisfies his necessary appetites, and confines his expenditure
to them; his other desires he subdues, under the idea that they
are unprofitable.

True.

He is a shabby fellow, who saves something out of everything and makes
a purse for himself; and this is the sort of man whom the vulgar applaud. 
Is he not a true image of the State which he represents?

He appears to me to be so; at any rate money is highly valued
by him as well as by the State.

You see that he is not a man of cultivation, I said.

I imagine not, he said; had he been educated he would never have
made a blind god director of his chorus, or given him chief honour.

Excellent!  I said.  Yet consider:  Must we not further admit
that owing to this want of cultivation there will be found in him
dronelike desires as of pauper and rogue, which are forcibly kept
down by his general habit of life?

True.

Do you know where you will have to look if you want to discover
his rogueries?

Where must I look?

You should see him where he has some great opportunity
of acting dishonestly, as in the guardianship of an orphan.

Aye.

It will be clear enough then that in his ordinary dealings which
give him a reputation for honesty he coerces his bad passions
by an enforced virtue; not making them see that they are wrong,
or taming them by reason, but by necessity and fear constraining them,
and because he trembles for his possessions.

To be sure.

Yes, indeed, my dear friend, but you will find that the natural
desires of the drone commonly exist in him all the same whenever
he has to spend what is not his own.

Yes, and they will be strong in him too.

The man, then, will be at war with himself; he will be two men,
and not one; but, in general, his better desires will be found
to prevail over his inferior ones.

True.

For these reasons such an one will be more respectable than most people;
yet the true virtue of a unanimous and harmonious soul will flee far
away and never come near him.

I should expect so.

And surely, the miser individually will be an ignoble competitor in a
State for any prize of victory, or other object of honourable ambition;
he will not spend his money in the contest for glory; so afraid
is he of awakening his expensive appetites and inviting them to help
and join in the struggle; in true oligarchical fashion he fights
with a small part only of his resources, and the result commonly
is that he loses the prize and saves his money.

Very true.

Can we any longer doubt, then, that the miser and money-maker
answers to the oligarchical State?

There can be no doubt.

Next comes democracy; of this the origin and nature have still
to be considered by us; and then we will enquire into the ways
of the democratic man, and bring him up for judgement.

That, he said, is our method.

Well, I said, and how does the change from oligarchy into democracy arise? 
Is it not on this wise?--The good at which such a State alms
is to become as rich as possible, a desire which is insatiable?

What then?

The rulers, being aware that their power rests upon their wealth,
refuse to curtail by law the extravagance of the spendthrift youth
because they gain by their ruin; they take interest from them and buy
up their estates and thus increase their own wealth and importance?

To be sure.

There can be no doubt that the love of wealth and the spirit
of moderation cannot exist together in citizens of the same State
to any considerable extent; one or the other will be disregarded.

That is tolerably clear.

And in oligarchical States, from the general spread of carelessness
and extravagance, men of good family have often been reduced
to beggary?

Yes, often.

And still they remain in the city; there they are, ready to sting
and fully armed, and some of them owe money, some have forfeited
their citizenship; a third class are in both predicaments;
and they hate and conspire against those who have got their property,
and against everybody else, and are eager for revolution.

That is true.

On the other hand, the men of business, stooping as they walk,
and pretending not even to see those whom they have already ruined,
insert their sting--that is, their money--into some one else who is
not on his guard against them, and recover the parent sum many times
over multiplied into a family of children:  and so they make drone
and pauper to abound in the State.

Yes, he said, there are plenty of them--that is certain.

The evil blazes up like a fire; and they will not extinguish it,
either by restricting a man's use of his own property, or by
another remedy:

What other?

One which is the next best, and has the advantage of compelling
the citizens to look to their characters:--Let there be a general rule
that every one shall enter into voluntary contracts at his own risk,
and there will be less of this scandalous money-making, and the evils
of which we were speaking will be greatly lessened in the State.

Yes, they will be greatly lessened.

At present the governors, induced by the motives which I have named,
treat their subjects badly; while they and their adherents,
especially the young men of the governing class, are habituated
to lead a life of luxury and idleness both of body and mind;
they do nothing, and are incapable of resisting either pleasure
or pain.

Very true.

They themselves care only for making money, and are as indifferent
as the pauper to the cultivation of virtue.

Yes, quite as indifferent.

Such is the state of affairs which prevails among them. 
And often rulers and their subjects may come in one another's way,
whether on a pilgrimage or a march, as fellow-soldiers
or fellow-sailors; aye, and they may observe the behaviour
of each other in the very moment of danger--for where danger is,
there is no fear that the poor will be despised by the rich--
and very likely the wiry sunburnt poor man may be placed in battle
at the side of a wealthy one who has never spoilt his complexion
and has plenty of superfluous flesh--when he sees such an one puffing
and at his wit's end, how can he avoid drawing the conclusion
that men like him are only rich because no one has the courage
to despoil them?  And when they meet in private will not people
be saying to one another `Our warriors are not good for much'?

Yes, he said, I am quite aware that this is their way of talking.

And, as in a body which is diseased the addition of a touch from without
may bring on illness, and sometimes even when there is no external
provocation a commotion may arise within-in the same way wherever
there is weakness in the State there is also likely to be illness,
of which the occasions may be very slight, the one party introducing
from without their oligarchical, the other their democratical allies,
and then the State falls sick, and is at war with herself;
and may be at times distracted, even when there is no external cause.

Yes, surely.

And then democracy comes into being after the poor have conquered
their opponents, slaughtering some and banishing some, while to
the remainder they give an equal share of freedom and power;
and this is the form of government in which the magistrates are
commonly elected by lot.

Yes, he said, that is the nature of democracy, whether the revolution
has been effected by arms, or whether fear has caused the opposite
party to withdraw.

And now what is their manner of life, and what sort of a government
have they? for as the government is, such will be the man.

Clearly, he said.

In the first place, are they not free; and is not the city full
of freedom and frankness--a man may say and do what he likes?

`Tis said so, he replied.

And where freedom is, the individual is clearly able to order
for himself his own life as he pleases?

Clearly.

Then in this kind of State there will be the greatest variety
of human natures?

There will.

This, then, seems likely to be the fairest of States, being an
embroidered robe which is spangled with every sort of flower. 
And just as women and children think a variety of colours to be of
all things most charming, so there are many men to whom this State,
which is spangled with the manners and characters of mankind,
will appear to be the fairest of States.

Yes.

Yes, my good Sir, and there will be no better in which to look
for a government.

Why?

Because of the liberty which reigns there--they have a complete
assortment of constitutions; and he who has a mind to establish
a State, as we have been doing, must go to a democracy as he would
to a bazaar at which they sell them, and pick out the one that
suits him; then, when he has made his choice, he may found his State.

He will be sure to have patterns enough.

And there being no necessity, I said, for you to govern in this State,
even if you have the capacity, or to be governed, unless you like,
or go to war when the rest go to war, or to be at peace when others
are at peace, unless you are so disposed--there being no necessity also,
because some law forbids you to hold office or be a dicast,
that you should not hold office or be a dicast, if you have a fancy--
is not this a way of life which for the moment is supremely
delightful

For the moment, yes.

And is not their humanity to the condemned in some cases quite charming? 
Have you not observed how, in a democracy, many persons, although they
have been sentenced to death or exile, just stay where they
are and walk about the world--the gentleman parades like a hero,
and nobody sees or cares?

Yes, he replied, many and many a one.

See too, I said, the forgiving spirit of democracy, and the `don't care'
about trifles, and the disregard which she shows of all the fine
principles which we solemnly laid down at the foundation of the city--
as when we said that, except in the case of some rarely gifted nature,
there never will be a good man who has not from his childhood been
used to play amid things of beauty and make of them a joy and a study--
how grandly does she trample all these fine notions of ours
under her feet, never giving a thought to the pursuits which make
a statesman, and promoting to honour any one who professes to be
the people's friend.

Yes, she is of a noble spirit.

These and other kindred characteristics are proper to democracy,
which is a charming form of government, full of variety and disorder,
and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequals alike.

We know her well.

Consider now, I said, what manner of man the individual is,
or rather consider, as in the case of the State, how he comes
into being.

Very good, he said.

Is not this the way--he is the son of the miserly and oligarchical
father who has trained him in his own habits?

Exactly.

And, like his father, he keeps under by force the pleasures
which are of the spending and not of the getting sort,
being those which are called unnecessary?

Obviously.

Would you like, for the sake of clearness, to distinguish
which are the necessary and which are the unnecessary pleasures?

I should.

Are not necessary pleasures those of which we cannot get rid, and of
which the satisfaction is a benefit to us?  And they are rightly so,
because we are framed by nature to desire both what is beneficial
and what is necessary, and cannot help it.

True.

We are not wrong therefore in calling them necessary?

We are not.

And the desires of which a man may get rid, if he takes pains from
his youth upwards--of which the presence, moreover, does no good,
and in some cases the reverse of good--shall we not be right in saying
that all these are unnecessary?

Yes, certainly.

Suppose we select an example of either kind, in order that we
may have a general notion of them?

Very good.

Will not the desire of eating, that is, of simple food and condiments,
in so far as they are required for health and strength,
be of the necessary class?

That is what I should suppose.

The pleasure of eating is necessary in two ways; it does us good
and it is essential to the continuance of life?

Yes.

But the condiments are only necessary in so far as they are good
for health?

Certainly.

And the desire which goes beyond this, or more delicate food,
or other luxuries, which might generally be got rid of,
if controlled and trained in youth, and is hurtful to the body,
and hurtful to the soul in the pursuit of wisdom and virtue,
may be rightly called unnecessary?

Very true.

May we not say that these desires spend, and that the others make
money because they conduce to production?

Certainly.

And of the pleasures of love, and all other pleasures, the same
holds good?

True.

And the drone of whom we spoke was he who was surfeited in pleasures
and desires of this sort, and was the slave of the unnecessary desires,
whereas he who was subject o the necessary only was miserly
and oligarchical?

Very true.

Again, let us see how the democratical man grows out of the oligarchical: 
the following, as I suspect, is commonly the process.

What is the process?

When a young man who has been brought up as we were just
now describing, in a vulgar and miserly way, has tasted drones'
honey and has come to associate with fierce and crafty natures
who are able to provide for him all sorts of refinements
and varieties of pleasure--then, as you may imagine, the change
will begin of the oligarchical principle within him into the democratical?

Inevitably.

And as in the city like was helping like, and the change was effected
by an alliance from without assisting one division of the citizens,
so too the young man is changed by a class of desires coming from
without to assist the desires within him, that which is and alike
again helping that which is akin and alike?

Certainly.

And if there be any ally which aids the oligarchical principle
within him, whether the influence of a father or of kindred,
advising or rebuking him, then there arises in his soul a faction
and an opposite faction, and he goes to war with himself.

It must be so.

And there are times when the democratical principle gives way to
the oligarchical, and some of his desires die, and others are banished;
a spirit of reverence enters into the young man's soul and order
is restored.

Yes, he said, that sometimes happens.

And then, again, after the old desires have been driven out,
fresh ones spring up, which are akin to them, and because he,
their father, does not know how to educate them, wax fierce
and numerous.

Yes, he said, that is apt to be the way.

They draw him to his old associates, and holding secret intercourse
with them, breed and multiply in him.

Very true.

At length they seize upon the citadel of the young man's soul,
which they perceive to be void of all accomplishments and fair
pursuits and true words, which make their abode in the minds of men
who are dear to the gods, and are their best guardians and sentinels.

None better.

False and boastful conceits and phrases mount upwards and take
their place.

They are certain to do so.

And so the young man returns into the country of the lotus-eaters,
and takes up his dwelling there in the face of all men; and if
any help be sent by his friends to the oligarchical part of him,
the aforesaid vain conceits shut the gate of the king's fastness;
and they will neither allow the embassy itself to enter,
private if private advisers offer the fatherly counsel of the aged
will they listen to them or receive them.  There is a battle
and they gain the day, and then modesty, which they call silliness,
is ignominiously thrust into exile by them, and temperance,
which they nickname unmanliness, is trampled in the mire and cast forth;
they persuade men that moderation and orderly expenditure are vulgarity
and meanness, and so, by the help of a rabble of evil appetites,
they drive them beyond the border.

Yes, with a will.

And when they have emptied and swept clean the soul of him who is now
in their power and who is being initiated by them in great mysteries,
the next thing is to bring back to their house insolence and
anarchy and waste and impudence in bright array having garlands
on their heads, and a great company with them, hymning their praises
and calling them by sweet names; insolence they term breeding,
and anarchy liberty, and waste magnificence, and impudence courage. 
And so the young man passes out of his original nature, which was
trained in the school of necessity, into the freedom and libertinism
of useless and unnecessary pleasures.

Yes, he said, the change in him is visible enough.

After this he lives on, spending his money and labour and time
on unnecessary pleasures quite as much as on necessary ones;
but if he be fortunate, and is not too much disordered in his wits,
when years have elapsed, and the heyday of passion is over--
supposing that he then re-admits into the city some part
of the exiled virtues, and does not wholly give himself up to
their successors--in that case he balances his pleasures and lives
in a sort of equilibrium, putting the government of himself
into the hands of the one which comes first and wins the turn;
and when he has had enough of that, then into the hands of another;
he despises none of them but encourages them all equally.

Very true, he said.

Neither does he receive or let pass into the fortress any true
word of advice; if any one says to him that some pleasures are the
satisfactions of good and noble desires, and others of evil desires,
and that he ought to use and honour some and chastise and master
the others--whenever this is repeated to him he shakes his head
and says that they are all alike, and that one is as good as another.

Yes, he said; that is the way with him.

Yes, I said, he lives from day to day indulging the appetite of the hour;
and sometimes he is lapped in drink and strains of the flute;
then he becomes a water-drinker, and tries to get thin; then he takes
a turn at gymnastics; sometimes idling and neglecting everything,
then once more living the life of a philosopher; often he-is busy
with politics, and starts to his feet and says and does whatever
comes into his head; and, if he is emulous of any one who is
a warrior, off he is in that direction, or of men of business,
once more in that.  His life has neither law nor order; and this
distracted existence he terms joy and bliss and freedom; and so he
goes on.

Yes, he replied, he is all liberty and equality.

Yes, I said; his life is motley and manifold and an epitome of the lives
of many;--he answers to the State which we described as fair and spangled. 
And many a man and many a woman will take him for their pattern,
and many a constitution and many an example of manners is contained
in him.

Just so.

Let him then be set over against democracy; he may truly be called
the democratic man.

Let that be his place, he said.

Last of all comes the most beautiful of all, man and State alike,
tyranny and the tyrant; these we have now to consider.

Quite true, he said.

Say then, my friend, in what manner does tyranny arise?--that it
has a democratic origin is evident.

Clearly.

And does not tyranny spring from democracy in the same manner
as democracy from oligarchy--I mean, after a sort?

How?

The good which oligarchy proposed to itself and the means
by which it was maintained was excess of wealth--am I not right?

Yes.

And the insatiable desire of wealth and the neglect of all other
things for the sake of money-getting was also the ruin of oligarchy?

True.

And democracy has her own good, of which the insatiable desire
brings her to dissolution?

What good?

Freedom, I replied; which, as they tell you in a democracy,
is the glory of the State--and that therefore in a democracy alone
will the freeman of nature deign to dwell.

Yes; the saying is in everybody's mouth.

I was going to observe, that the insatiable desire of this and
the neglect of other things introduces the change in democracy,
which occasions a demand for tyranny.

How so?

When a democracy which is thirsting for freedom has evil cupbearers
presiding over the feast, and has drunk too deeply of the strong
wine of freedom, then, unless her rulers are very amenable and give
a plentiful draught, she calls them to account and punishes them,
and says that they are cursed oligarchs.

Yes, he replied, a very common occurrence.

Yes, I said; and loyal citizens are insultingly termed by her
slaves who hug their chains and men of naught; she would have
subjects who are like rulers, and rulers who are like subjects: 
these are men after her own heart, whom she praises and honours
both in private and public.  Now, in such a State, can liberty
have any limit?

Certainly not.

By degrees the anarchy finds a way into private houses, and ends
by getting among the animals and infecting them.

How do you mean?

I mean that the father grows accustomed to descend to the level of his
sons and to fear them, and the son is on a level with his father,
he having no respect or reverence for either of his parents;
and this is his freedom, and metic is equal with the citizen
and the citizen with the metic, and the stranger is quite as good
as either.

Yes, he said, that is the way.

And these are not the only evils, I said--there are several lesser ones: 
In such a state of society the master fears and flatters his scholars,
and the scholars despise their masters and tutors; young and old
are all alike; and the young man is on a level with the old,
and is ready to compete with him in word or deed; and old men
condescend to the young and are full of pleasantry and gaiety;
they are loth to be thought morose and authoritative, and therefore they
adopt the manners of the young.

Quite true, he said.

The last extreme of popular liberty is when the slave bought with money,
whether male or female, is just as free as his or her purchaser;
nor must I forget to tell of the liberty and equality of the two sexes
in relation to each other.

Why not, as Aeschylus says, utter the word which rises to our lips?

That is what I am doing, I replied; and I must add that no one
who does not know would believe, how much greater is the liberty
which the animals who are under the dominion of man have in a democracy
than in any other State:  for truly, the she-dogs, as the proverb says,
are as good as their she-mistresses, and the horses and asses have
a way of marching along with all the rights and dignities of freemen;
and they will run at anybody who comes in their way if he does
not leave the road clear for them:  and all things are just ready
to burst with liberty.

When I take a country walk, he said, I often experience what you describe. 
You and I have dreamed the same thing.

And above all, I said, and as the result of all, see how sensitive
the citizens become; they chafe impatiently at the least touch
of authority and at length, as you know, they cease to care even
for the laws, written or unwritten; they will have no one over them.

Yes, he said, I know it too well.

Such, my friend, I said, is the fair and glorious beginning
out of which springs tyranny.

Glorious indeed, he said.  But what is the next step?

The ruin of oligarchy is the ruin of democracy; the same disease
magnified and intensified by liberty overmasters democracy--
the truth being that the excessive increase of anything often
causes a reaction in the opposite direction; and this is the case
not only in the seasons and in vegetable and animal life, but above
all in forms of government.

True.

The excess of liberty, whether in States or individuals,
seems only to pass into excess of slavery.

Yes, the natural order.

And so tyranny naturally arises out of democracy, and the most
aggravated form of tyranny and slavery out of the most extreme
form of liberty?

As we might expect.

That, however, was not, as I believe, your question-you rather
desired to know what is that disorder which is generated alike
in oligarchy and democracy, and is the ruin of both?

Just so, he replied.

Well, I said, I meant to refer to the class of idle spendthrifts,
of whom the more courageous are the-leaders and the more timid
the followers, the same whom we were comparing to drones, some stingless,
and others having stings.

A very just comparison.

These two classes are the plagues of every city in which they
are generated, being what phlegm and bile are to the body. 
And the good physician and lawgiver of the State ought, like the wise
bee-master, to keep them at a distance and prevent, if possible,
their ever coming in; and if they have anyhow found a way in,
then he should have them and their cells cut out as speedily
as possible.

Yes, by all means, he said.

Then, in order that we may see clearly what we are doing, let us
imagine democracy to be divided, as indeed it is, into three classes;
for in the first place freedom creates rather more drones in
the democratic than there were in the oligarchical State.

That is true.

And in the democracy they are certainly more intensified.

How so?

Because in the oligarchical State they are disqualified and driven
from office, and therefore they cannot train or gather strength;
whereas in a democracy they are almost the entire ruling power,
and while the keener sort speak and act, the rest keep buzzing
about the bema and do not suffer a word to be said on the other side;
hence in democracies almost everything is managed by the drones.

Very true, he said.

Then there is another class which is always being severed from
the mass.

What is that?

They are the orderly class, which in a nation of traders sure
to be the richest.

Naturally so.

They are the most squeezable persons and yield the largest amount
of honey to the drones.

Why, he said, there is little to be squeezed out of people
who have little.

And this is called the wealthy class, and the drones feed upon them.

That is pretty much the case, he said.

The people are a third class, consisting of those who work with their
own hands; they are not politicians, and have not much to live upon. 
This, when assembled, is the largest and most powerful class in a democracy.

True, he said; but then the multitude is seldom willing to congregate
unless they get a little honey.

And do they not share?  I said.  Do not their leaders deprive
the rich of their estates and distribute them among the people;
at the same time taking care to reserve the larger part for themselves?

Why, yes, he said, to that extent the people do share.

And the persons whose property is taken from them are compelled
to defend themselves before the people as they best can?

What else can they do?

And then, although they may have no desire of change, the others
charge them with plotting against the people and being friends
of oligarchy?  True.

And the end is that when they see the people, not of their own accord,
but through ignorance, and because they are deceived by informers,
seeking to do them wrong, then at last they are forced to become
oligarchs in reality; they do not wish to be, but the sting of
the drones torments them and breeds revolution in them.

That is exactly the truth.

Then come impeachments and judgments and trials of one another.

True.

The people have always some champion whom they set over them
and nurse into greatness.

Yes, that is their way.

This and no other is the root from which a tyrant springs;
when he first appears above ground he is a protector.

Yes, that is quite clear.

How then does a protector begin to change into a tyrant? 
Clearly when he does what the man is said to do in the tale
of the Arcadian temple of Lycaean Zeus.

What tale?

The tale is that he who has tasted the entrails of a single human
victim minced up with the entrails of other victims is destined
to become a wolf.  Did you never hear it?

Oh, yes.

And the protector of the people is like him; having a mob entirely at
his disposal, he is not restrained from shedding the blood of kinsmen;
by the favourite method of false accusation he brings them into
court and murders them, making the life of man to disappear,
and with unholy tongue and lips tasting the blood of his fellow citizen;
some he kills and others he banishes, at the same time hinting
at the abolition of debts and partition of lands:  and after this,
what will be his destiny?  Must he not either perish at the hands
of his enemies, or from being a man become a wolf--that is,
a tyrant?

Inevitably.

This, I said, is he who begins to make a party against the rich?

The same.

After a while he is driven out, but comes back, in spite of his enemies,
a tyrant full grown.

That is clear.

And if they are unable to expel him, or to get him condemned
to death by a public accusation, they conspire to assassinate him.

Yes, he said, that is their usual way.

Then comes the famous request for a bodyguard, which is the device
of all those who have got thus far in their tyrannical career--`Let
not the people's friend,' as they say, `be lost to them.'

Exactly.

The people readily assent; all their fears are for him--
they have none for themselves.

Very true.

And when a man who is wealthy and is also accused of being an enemy
of the people sees this, then, my friend, as the oracle said to Croesus,

          By pebbly Hermus' shore he flees and rests not and is not
          ashamed to be a coward.

And quite right too, said he, for if he were, he would never be
ashamed again.

But if he is caught he dies.

Of course.

And he, the protector of whom we spoke, is to be seen, not `larding
the plain' with his bulk, but himself the overthrower of many,
standing up in the chariot of State with the reins in his hand,
no longer protector, but tyrant absolute.

No doubt, he said.

And now let us consider the happiness of the man, and also
of the State in which a creature like him is generated.

Yes, he said, let us consider that.

At first, in the early days of his power, he is full of smiles,
and he salutes every one whom he meets;--he to be called a tyrant,
who is making promises in public and also in private! liberating debtors,
and distributing land to the people and his followers, and wanting
to be so kind and good to every one!

Of course, he said.

But when he has disposed of foreign enemies by conquest or treaty,
and there is nothing to fear from them, then he is always stirring up
some war or other, in order that the people may require a leader.

To be sure.

Has he not also another object, which is that they may be impoverished
by payment of taxes, and thus compelled to devote themselves to their
daily wants and therefore less likely to conspire against him?  Clearly.

And if any of them are suspected by him of having notions of freedom,
and of resistance to his authority, he will have a good pretext
for destroying them by placing them at the mercy of the enemy;
and for all these reasons the tyrant must be always getting up
a war.

He must.

Now he begins to grow unpopular.

A necessary result.

Then some of those who joined in setting him up, and who are in power,
speak their minds to him and to one another, and the more courageous
of them cast in his teeth what is being done.

Yes, that may be expected.

And the tyrant, if he means to rule, must get rid of them; he cannot
stop while he has a friend or an enemy who is good for anything.

He cannot.

And therefore he must look about him and see who is valiant,
who is high-minded, who is wise, who is wealthy; happy man,
he is the enemy of them all, and must seek occasion against them
whether he will or no, until he has made a purgation of the State.

Yes, he said, and a rare purgation.

Yes, I said, not the sort of purgation which the physicians make
of the body; for they take away the worse and leave the better part,
but he does the reverse.

If he is to rule, I suppose that he cannot help himself.

What a blessed alternative, I said:--to be compelled to dwell only
with the many bad, and to be by them hated, or not to live at all!

Yes, that is the alternative.

And the more detestable his actions are to the citizens the more
satellites and the greater devotion in them will he require?

Certainly.

And who are the devoted band, and where will he procure them?

They will flock to him, he said, of their own accord, if lie pays them.

By the dog!  I said, here are more drones, of every sort and from
every land.

Yes, he said, there are.

But will he not desire to get them on the spot?

How do you mean?

He will rob the citizens of their slaves; he will then set them
free and enrol them in his bodyguard.

To be sure, he said; and he will be able to trust them best of all.

What a blessed creature, I said, must this tyrant be; he has put
to death the others and has these for his trusted friends.

Yes, he said; they are quite of his sort.

Yes, I said, and these are the new citizens whom he has
called into existence, who admire him and are his companions,
while the good hate and avoid him.

Of course.

Verily, then, tragedy is a wise thing and Euripides a great tragedian.

Why so?

Why, because he is the author of the pregnant saying,

          Tyrants are wise by living with the wise;

and he clearly meant to say that they are the wise whom the tyrant
makes his companions.

Yes, he said, and he also praises tyranny as godlike; and many other
things of the same kind are said by him and by the other poets.

And therefore, I said, the tragic poets being wise men will forgive
us and any others who live after our manner if we do not receive
them into our State, because they are the eulogists of tyranny.

Yes, he said, those who have the wit will doubtless forgive us.

But they will continue to go to other cities and attract mobs,
and hire voices fair and loud and persuasive, and draw the cities
over to tyrannies and democracies.

Very true.

Moreover, they are paid for this and receive honour--the greatest honour,
as might be expected, from tyrants, and the next greatest
from democracies; but the higher they ascend our constitution hill,
the more their reputation fails, and seems unable from shortness
of breath to proceed further.

True.

But we are wandering from the subject:  Let us therefore return
and enquire how the tyrant will maintain that fair and numerous
and various and ever-changing army of his.

If, he said, there are sacred treasures in the city, he will
confiscate and spend them; and in so far as the fortunes
of attainted persons may suffice, he will be able to diminish
the taxes which he would otherwise have to impose upon the people.

And when these fail?

Why, clearly, he said, then he and his boon companions, whether male
or female, will be maintained out of his father's estate.

You mean to say that the people, from whom he has derived his being,
will maintain him and his companions?

Yes, he said; they cannot help themselves.

But what if the people fly into a passion, and aver that a grown-up
son ought not to be supported by his father, but that the father
should be supported by the son?  The father did not bring him
into being, or settle him in life, in order that when his son
became a man he should himself be the servant of his own servants
and should support him and his rabble of slaves and companions;
but that his son should protect him, and that by his help he might
be emancipated from the government of the rich and aristocratic,
as they are termed.  And so he bids him and his companions depart,
just as any other father might drive out of the house a riotous son
and his undesirable associates.

By heaven, he said, then the parent will discover what a monster he
has been fostering in his bosom; and, when he wants to drive him out,
he will find that he is weak and his son strong.

Why, you do not mean to say that the tyrant will use violence? 
What! beat his father if he opposes him?

Yes, he will, having first disarmed him.

Then he is a parricide, and a cruel guardian of an aged parent;
and this is real tyranny, about which there can be no longer a mistake: 
as the saying is, the people who would escape the smoke which is
the slavery of freemen, has fallen into the fire which is the tyranny
of slaves.  Thus liberty, getting out of all order and reason,
passes into the harshest and bitterest form of slavery.

True, he said.

Very well; and may we not rightly say that we have sufficiently
discussed the nature of tyranny, and the manner of the transition
from democracy to tyranny?

Yes, quite enough, he said.

BOOK IX

SOCRATES - ADEIMANTUS

LAST of all comes the tyrannical man; about whom we have once more to ask,
how is he formed out of the democratical? and how does he live,
in happiness or in misery?

Yes, he said, he is the only one remaining.

There is, however, I said, a previous question which remains unanswered.

What question?

I do not think that we have adequately determined the nature
and number of the appetites, and until this is accomplished
the enquiry will always be confused.

Well, he said, it is not too late to supply the omission.

Very true, I said; and observe the point which I want to understand: 
Certain of the unnecessary pleasures and appetites I conceive
to be unlawful; every one appears to have them, but in some persons
they are controlled by the laws and by reason, and the better
desires prevail over them-either they are wholly banished or they
become few and weak; while in the case of others they are stronger,
and there are more of them.

Which appetites do you mean?

I mean those which are awake when the reasoning and human and ruling
power is asleep; then the wild beast within us, gorged with meat
or drink, starts up and having shaken off sleep, goes forth to
satisfy his desires; and there is no conceivable folly or crime--
not excepting incest or any other unnatural union, or parricide,
or the eating of forbidden food--which at such a time, when he has
parted company with all shame and sense, a man may not be ready
to commit.

Most true, he said.

But when a man's pulse is healthy and temperate, and when before
going to sleep he has awakened his rational powers, and fed them
on noble thoughts and enquiries, collecting himself in meditation;
after having first indulged his appetites neither too much nor
too little, but just enough to lay them to sleep, and prevent
them and their enjoyments and pains from interfering with the
higher principle--which he leaves in the solitude of pure abstraction,
free to contemplate and aspire to the knowledge of the unknown,
whether in past, present, or future:  when again he has allayed
the passionate element, if he has a quarrel against any one--
I say, when, after pacifying the two irrational principles, he rouses up
the third, which is reason, before he takes his rest, then, as you know,
he attains truth most nearly, and is least likely to be the sport
of fantastic and lawless visions.

I quite agree.

In saying this I have been running into a digression; but the point
which I desire to note is that in all of us, even in good men,
there is a lawless wild-beast nature, which peers out in sleep. 
Pray, consider whether I am right, and you agree with me.

Yes, I agree.

And now remember the character which we attributed to the democratic man. 
He was supposed from his youth upwards to have been trained under
a miserly parent, who encouraged the saving appetites in him,
but discountenanced the unnecessary, which aim only at amusement
and ornament?

True.

And then he got into the company of a more refined, licentious sort
of people, and taking to all their wanton ways rushed into the opposite
extreme from an abhorrence of his father's meanness.  At last,
being a better man than his corruptors, he was drawn in both directions
until he halted midway and led a life, not of vulgar and slavish passion,
but of what he deemed moderate indulgence in various pleasures. 
After this manner the democrat was generated out of the oligarch?

Yes, he said; that was our view of him, and is so still.

And now, I said, years will have passed away, and you must conceive
this man, such as he is, to have a son, who is brought up in his
father's principles.

I can imagine him.

Then you must further imagine the same thing to happen to the son
which has already happened to the father:--he is drawn into a perfectly
lawless life, which by his seducers is termed perfect liberty;
and his father and friends take part with his moderate desires,
and the opposite party assist the opposite ones.  As soon as these dire
magicians and tyrant-makers find that they are losing their hold on him,
they contrive to implant in him a master passion, to be lord over
his idle and spendthrift lusts--a sort of monstrous winged drone--
that is the only image which will adequately describe him.

Yes, he said, that is the only adequate image of him.

And when his other lusts, amid clouds of incense and perfumes
and garlands and wines, and all the pleasures of a dissolute life,
now let loose, come buzzing around him, nourishing to the utmost
the sting of desire which they implant in his drone-like nature,
then at last this lord of the soul, having Madness for the captain
of his guard, breaks out into a frenzy:  and if he finds in himself
any good opinions or appetites in process of formation, and there
is in him any sense of shame remaining, to these better principles he
puts an end, and casts them forth until he has purged away temperance
and brought in madness to the full.

Yes, he said, that is the way in which the tyrannical man is generated.

And is not this the reason why of old love has been called a tyrant?

I should not wonder.

Further, I said, has not a drunken man also the spirit of a tyrant?

He has.

And you know that a man who is deranged and not right in his mind,
will fancy that he is able to rule, not only over men, but also over
the gods?

That he will.

And the tyrannical man in the true sense of the word comes
into being when, either under the influence of nature, or habit,
or both, he becomes drunken, lustful, passionate?  O my friend,
is not that so?

Assuredly.

Such is the man and such is his origin.  And next, how does he live?

Suppose, as people facetiously say, you were to tell me.

I imagine, I said, at the next step in his progress, that there
will be feasts and carousals and revellings and courtezans,
and all that sort of thing; Love is the lord of the house within him,
and orders all the concerns of his soul.

That is certain.

Yes; and every day and every night desires grow up many and formidable,
and their demands are many.

They are indeed, he said.

His revenues, if he has any, are soon spent.

True.

Then comes debt and the cutting down of his property.

Of course.

When he has nothing left, must not his desires, crowding in the nest
like young ravens, be crying aloud for food; and he, goaded on by them,
and especially by love himself, who is in a manner the captain
of them, is in a frenzy, and would fain discover whom he can defraud
or despoil of his property, in order that he may gratify them?

Yes, that is sure to be the case.

He must have money, no matter how, if he is to escape horrid pains
and pangs.

He must.

And as in himself there was a succession of pleasures, and the new
got the better of the old and took away their rights, so he being
younger will claim to have more than his father and his mother,
and if he has spent his own share of the property, he will take
a slice of theirs.

No doubt he will.

And if his parents will not give way, then he will try first
of all to cheat and deceive them.

Very true.

And if he fails, then he will use force and plunder them.

Yes, probably.

And if the old man and woman fight for their own, what then, my friend? 
Will the creature feel any compunction at tyrannizing over them?

Nay, he said, I should not feel at all comfortable about his parents.

But, O heavens!  Adeimantus, on account of some newfangled love
of a harlot, who is anything but a necessary connection, can you
believe that he would strike the mother who is his ancient friend
and necessary to his very existence, and would place her under
the authority of the other, when she is brought under the same roof
with her; or that, under like circumstances, he would do the same
to his withered old father, first and most indispensable of friends,
for the sake of some newly found blooming youth who is the reverse
of indispensable?

Yes, indeed, he said; I believe that he would.

Truly, then, I said, a tyrannical son is a blessing to his father
and mother.

He is indeed, he replied.

He first takes their property, and when that falls, and pleasures
are beginning to swarm in the hive of his soul, then he breaks
into a house, or steals the garments of some nightly wayfarer;
next he proceeds to clear a temple.  Meanwhile the old opinions
which he had when a child, and which gave judgment about good and evil,
are overthrown by those others which have just been emancipated,
and are now the bodyguard of love and share his empire. 
These in his democratic days, when he was still subject to the laws
and to his father, were only let loose in the dreams of sleep. 
But now that he is under the dominion of love, he becomes always
and in waking reality what he was then very rarely and in a dream only;
he will commit the foulest murder, or eat forbidden food, or be
guilty of any other horrid act.  Love is his tyrant, and lives
lordly in him and lawlessly, and being himself a king, leads him on,
as a tyrant leads a State, to the performance of any reckless deed
by which he can maintain himself and the rabble of his associates,
whether those whom evil communications have brought in from without,
or those whom he himself has allowed to break loose within him by reason
of a similar evil nature in himself.  Have we not here a picture of his way
of life?

Yes, indeed, he said.

And if there are only a few of them in the State, the rest of the people
are well disposed, they go away and become the bodyguard or mercenary
soldiers of some other tyrant who may probably want them for a war;
and if there is no war, they stay at home and do many little pieces
of mischief in the city.

What sort of mischief?

For example, they are the thieves, burglars, cutpurses, footpads,
robbers of temples, man-stealers of the community; or if they
are able to speak they turn informers, and bear false witness,
and take bribes.

A small catalogue of evils, even if the perpetrators of them
are few in number.

Yes, I said; but small and great are comparative terms,
and all these things, in the misery and evil which they inflict
upon a State, do not come within a thousand miles of the tyrant;
when this noxious class and their followers grow numerous and become
conscious of their strength, assisted by the infatuation of the people,
they choose from among themselves the one who has most of the tyrant
in his own soul, and him they create their tyrant.

Yes, he said, and he will be the most fit to be a tyrant.

If the people yield, well and good; but if they resist him,
as he began by beating his own father and mother, so now, if he has
the power, he beats them, and will keep his dear old fatherland
or motherland, as the Cretans say, in subjection to his young
retainers whom he has introduced to be their rulers and masters. 
This is the end of his passions and desires.

Exactly.

When such men are only private individuals and before they get power,
this is their character; they associate entirely with their own
flatterers or ready tools; or if they want anything from anybody,
they in their turn are equally ready to bow down before them: 
they profess every sort of affection for them; but when they have gained
their point they know them no more.

Yes, truly.

They are always either the masters or servants and never the friends
of anybody; the tyrant never tastes of true freedom or friendship.

Certainly not.

And may we not rightly call such men treacherous?

No question.

Also they are utterly unjust, if we were right in our notion
of justice?

Yes, he said, and we were perfectly right.

Let us then sum up in a word, I said, the character of the worst man: 
he is the waking reality of what we dreamed.

Most true.

And this is he who being by nature most of a tyrant bears rule,
and the longer he lives the more of a tyrant he becomes.

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

That is certain, said Glaucon, taking his turn to answer.

And will not he who has been shown to be the wickedest, be also
the most miserable? and he who has tyrannized longest and most,
most continually and truly miserable; although this may not be
the opinion of men in general?

Yes, he said, inevitably.

And must not the tyrannical man be like the tyrannical, State, and the
democratical man like the democratical State; and the same of the others?

Certainly.

And as State is to State in virtue and happiness, so is man
in relation to man?

To be sure.

Then comparing our original city, which was under a king,
and the city which is under a tyrant, how do they stand as to virtue?

They are the opposite extremes, he said, for one is the very best
and the other is the very worst.

There can be no mistake, I said, as to which is which, and therefore
I will at once enquire whether you would arrive at a similar decision
about their relative happiness and misery.  And here we must not allow
ourselves to be panic-stricken at the apparition of the tyrant,
who is only a unit and may perhaps have a few retainers about him;
but let us go as we ought into every corner of the city and look
all about, and then we will give our opinion.

A fair invitation, he replied; and I see, as every one must,
that a tyranny is the wretchedest form of government, and the rule
of a king the happiest.

And in estimating the men too, may I not fairly make a like request,
that I should have a judge whose mind can enter into and see through
human nature?  He must not be like a child who looks at the outside
and is dazzled at the pompous aspect which the tyrannical nature
assumes to the beholder, but let him be one who has a clear insight. 
May I suppose that the judgment is given in the hearing of us all
by one who is able to judge, and has dwelt in the same place with him,
and been present at his dally life and known him in his family relations,
where he may be seen stripped of his tragedy attire, and again
in the hour of public danger--he shall tell us about the happiness
and misery of the tyrant when compared with other men?

That again, he said, is a very fair proposal.

Shall I assume that we ourselves are able and experienced judges
and have before now met with such a person?  We shall then have
some one who will answer our enquiries.

By all means.

Let me ask you not to forget the parallel of the individual and the State;
bearing this in mind, and glancing in turn from one to the other
of them, will you tell me their respective conditions?

What do you mean? he asked.

Beginning with the State, I replied, would you say that a city
which is governed by a tyrant is free or enslaved?

No city, he said, can be more completely enslaved.

And yet, as you see, there are freemen as well as masters in such
a State?

Yes, he said, I see that there are--a few; but the people,
speaking generally, and the best of them, are miserably degraded
and enslaved.

Then if the man is like the State, I said, must not the same rule
prevail? his soul is full of meanness and vulgarity--the best
elements in him are enslaved; and there is a small ruling part,
which is also the worst and maddest.

Inevitably.

And would you say that the soul of such an one is the soul of a freeman,
or of a slave?

He has the soul of a slave, in my opinion.

And the State which is enslaved under a tyrant is utterly incapable
of acting voluntarily?

Utterly incapable.

And also the soul which is under a tyrant (I am speaking of the soul
taken as a whole) is least capable of doing what she desires;
there is a gadfly which goads her, and she is full of trouble
and remorse?

Certainly.

And is the city which is under a tyrant rich or poor?

Poor.

And the tyrannical soul must be always poor and insatiable?

True.

And must not such a State and such a man be always full of fear?

Yes, indeed.

Is there any State in which you will find more of lamentation
and sorrow and groaning and pain?

Certainly not.

And is there any man in whom you will find more of this sort of misery
than in the tyrannical man, who is in a fury of passions and desires?

Impossible.

Reflecting upon these and similar evils, you held the tyrannical
State to be the most miserable of States?

And I was right, he said.

Certainly, I said.  And when you see the same evils in the tyrannical man,
what do you say of him?

I say that he is by far the most miserable of all men.

There, I said, I think that you are beginning to go wrong.

What do you mean?

I do not think that he has as yet reached the utmost extreme of misery.

Then who is more miserable?

One of whom I am about to speak.

Who is that?

He who is of a tyrannical nature, and instead of leading a private life
has been cursed with the further misfortune of being a public tyrant.

From what has been said, I gather that you are right.

Yes, I replied, but in this high argument you should be a little
more certain, and should not conjecture only; for of all questions,
this respecting good and evil is the greatest.

Very true, he said.

Let me then offer you an illustration, which may, I think,
throw a light upon this subject.

What is your illustration?

The case of rich individuals in cities who possess many slaves: 
from them you may form an idea of the tyrant's condition,
for they both have slaves; the only difference is that he has
more slaves.

Yes, that is the difference.

You know that they live securely and have nothing to apprehend
from their servants?

What should they fear?

Nothing.  But do you observe the reason of this?

Yes; the reason is, that the whole city is leagued together
for the protection of each individual.

Very true, I said.  But imagine one of these owners, the master
say of some fifty slaves, together with his family and property
and slaves, carried off by a god into the wilderness, where there
are no freemen to help him--will he not be in an agony of fear lest
he and his wife and children should be put to death by his slaves?

Yes, he said, he will be in the utmost fear.

The time has arrived when he will be compelled to flatter divers of
his slaves, and make many promises to them of freedom and other things,
much against his will--he will have to cajole his own servants.

Yes, he said, that will be the only way of saving himself.

And suppose the same god, who carried him away, to surround him with
neighbours who will not suffer one man to be the master of another,
and who, if they could catch the offender, would take his life?

His case will be still worse, if you suppose him to be everywhere
surrounded and watched by enemies.

And is not this the sort of prison in which the tyrant will be bound--
he who being by nature such as we have described, is full of all sorts
of fears and lusts?  His soul is dainty and greedy, and yet alone,
of all men in the city, he is never allowed to go on a journey,
or to see the things which other freemen desire to see, but he
lives in his hole like a woman hidden in the house, and is jealous
of any other citizen who goes into foreign parts and sees anything
of interest.

Very true, he said.

And amid evils such as these will not he who is ill-governed
in his own person--the tyrannical man, I mean--whom you
just now decided to be the most miserable of all--will not he
be yet more miserable when, instead of leading a private life,
he is constrained by fortune to be a public tyrant? 
He has to be master of others when he is not master of himself: 
he is like a diseased or paralytic man who is compelled to pass
his life, not in retirement, but fighting and combating with other men.

Yes, he said, the similitude is most exact.

Is not his case utterly miserable? and does not the actual tyrant
lead a worse life than he whose life you determined to be the worst?

Certainly.

He who is the real tyrant, whatever men may think, is the real slave,
and is obliged to practise the greatest adulation and servility,
and to be the flatterer of the vilest of mankind.  He has desires
which he is utterly unable to satisfy, and has more wants than any one,
and is truly poor, if you know how to inspect the whole soul of him: 
all his life long he is beset with fear and is full of convulsions,
and distractions, even as the State which he resembles: 
and surely the resemblance holds?

Very true, he said.

Moreover, as we were saying before, he grows worse from having power: 
he becomes and is of necessity more jealous, more faithless,
more unjust, more friendless, more impious, than he was at first;
he is the purveyor and cherisher of every sort of vice, and the consequence
is that he is supremely miserable, and that he makes everybody else
as miserable as himself.

No man of any sense will dispute your words.

Come then, I said, and as the general umpire in theatrical
contests proclaims the result, do you also decide who in your
opinion is first in the scale of happiness, and who second,
and in what order the others follow:  there are five of them in all--
they are the royal, timocratical, oligarchical, democratical, tyrannical.

The decision will be easily given, he replied; they shall be choruses
coming on the stage, and I must judge them in the order in which
they enter, by the criterion of virtue and vice, happiness and misery.

Need we hire a herald, or shall I announce, that the son of Ariston
(the best) has decided that the best and justest is also the happiest,
and that this is he who is the most royal man and king over himself;
and that the worst and most unjust man is also the most miserable,
and that this is he who being the greatest tyrant of himself is also the
greatest tyrant of his State?

Make the proclamation yourself, he said.

And shall I add, `whether seen or unseen by gods and men'?

Let the words be added.

Then this, I said, will be our first proof; and there is another,
which may also have some weight.

What is that?

The second proof is derived from the nature of the soul: 
seeing that the individual soul, like the State, has been
divided by us into three principles, the division may, I think,
furnish a new demonstration.

Of what nature?

It seems to me that to these three principles three pleasures correspond;
also three desires and governing powers.

How do you mean? he said.

There is one principle with which, as we were saying, a man learns,
another with which he is angry; the third, having many forms,
has no special name, but is denoted by the general term appetitive,
from the extraordinary strength and vehemence of the desires of eating
and drinking and the other sensual appetites which are the main
elements of it; also money-loving, because such desires are generally
satisfied by the help of money.

That is true, he said.

If we were to say that the loves and pleasures of this third part
were concerned with gain, we should then be able to fall back
on a single notion; and might truly and intelligibly describe
this part of the soul as loving gain or money.

I agree with you.

Again, is not the passionate element wholly set on ruling
and conquering and getting fame?

True.

Suppose we call it the contentious or ambitious--would the term
be suitable?

Extremely suitable.

On the other hand, every one sees that the principle of knowledge
is wholly directed to the truth, and cares less than either
of the others for gain or fame.

Far less.

`Lover of wisdom,' `lover of knowledge,' are titles which we
may fitly apply to that part of the soul?

Certainly.

One principle prevails in the souls of one class of men,
another in others, as may happen?

Yes.

Then we may begin by assuming that there are three classes of men--
lovers of wisdom, lovers of honour, lovers of gain?

Exactly.

And there are three kinds of pleasure, which are their several objects?

Very true.

Now, if you examine the three classes of men, and ask of them
in turn which of their lives is pleasantest, each will be found
praising his own and depreciating that of others:  the money-maker
will contrast the vanity of honour or of learning if they bring
no money with the solid advantages of gold and silver?

True, he said.

And the lover of honour--what will be his opinion?  Will he not think
that the pleasure of riches is vulgar, while the pleasure of learning,
if it brings no distinction, is all smoke and nonsense to him?

Very true.

And are we to suppose, I said, that the philosopher sets any value on
other pleasures in comparison with the pleasure of knowing the truth,
and in that pursuit abiding, ever learning, not so far indeed from the heaven
of pleasure?  Does he not call the other pleasures necessary, under the
idea that if there were no necessity for them, he would rather not have them?

There can be no doubt of that, he replied.

Since, then, the pleasures of each class and the life of each are
in dispute, and the question is not which life is more or less honourable,
or better or worse, but which is the more pleasant or painless--
how shall we know who speaks truly?

I cannot myself tell, he said.

Well, but what ought to be the criterion?  Is any better than
experience and wisdom and reason?

There cannot be a better, he said.

Then, I said, reflect.  Of the three individuals, which has
the greatest experience of all the pleasures which we enumerated? 
Has the lover of gain, in learning the nature of essential truth,
greater experience of the pleasure of knowledge than the philosopher has
of the pleasure of gain?

The philosopher, he replied, has greatly the advantage; for he has
of necessity always known the taste of the other pleasures from his
childhood upwards:  but the lover of gain in all his experience has
not of necessity tasted--or, I should rather say, even had he desired,
could hardly have tasted--the sweetness of learning and knowing truth.

Then the lover of wisdom has a great advantage over the lover of gain,
for he has a double experience?

Yes, very great.

Again, has he greater experience of the pleasures of honour,
or the lover of honour of the pleasures of wisdom?

Nay, he said, all three are honoured in proportion as they attain
their object; for the rich man and the brave man and the wise
man alike have their crowd of admirers, and as they all receive
honour they all have experience of the pleasures of honour;
but the delight which is to be found in the knowledge of true being
is known to the philosopher only.

His experience, then, will enable him to judge better than any one?

Far better.

And he is the only one who has wisdom as well as experience?

Certainly.

Further, the very faculty which is the instrument of judgment is not
possessed by the covetous or ambitious man, but only by the philosopher?

What faculty?

Reason, with whom, as we were saying, the decision ought to rest.

Yes.

And reasoning is peculiarly his instrument?

Certainly.

If wealth and gain were the criterion, then the praise or blame
of the lover of gain would surely be the most trustworthy?

Assuredly.

Or if honour or victory or courage, in that case the judgement
of the ambitious or pugnacious would be the truest?

Clearly.

But since experience and wisdom and reason are the judges--

The only inference possible, he replied, is that pleasures which
are approved by the lover of wisdom and reason are the truest.

And so we arrive at the result, that the pleasure of the intelligent
part of the soul is the pleasantest of the three, and that he of us
in whom this is the ruling principle has the pleasantest life.

Unquestionably, he said, the wise man speaks with authority when he
approves of his own life.

And what does the judge affirm to be the life which is next,
and the pleasure which is next?

Clearly that of the soldier and lover of honour; who is nearer
to himself than the money-maker.

Last comes the lover of gain?

Very true, he said.

Twice in succession, then, has the just man overthrown the unjust
in this conflict; and now comes the third trial, which is
dedicated to Olympian Zeus the saviour:  a sage whispers in my ear
that no pleasure except that of the wise is quite true and pure--
all others are a shadow only; and surely this will prove the greatest
and most decisive of falls?

Yes, the greatest; but will you explain yourself?

I will work out the subject and you shall answer my questions.

Proceed.

Say, then, is not pleasure opposed to pain?

True.

And there is a neutral state which is neither pleasure nor pain?

There is.

A state which is intermediate, and a sort of repose of the soul
about either--that is what you mean?

Yes.

You remember what people say when they are sick?

What do they say?

That after all nothing is pleasanter than health.  But then they
never knew this to be the greatest of pleasures until they were ill.

Yes, I know, he said.

And when persons are suffering from acute pain, you must. 
have heard them say that there is nothing pleasanter than to get rid
of their pain?

I have.

And there are many other cases of suffering in which the mere rest
and cessation of pain, and not any positive enjoyment, is extolled
by them as the greatest pleasure?

Yes, he said; at the time they are pleased and well content to be
at rest.

Again, when pleasure ceases, that sort of rest or cessation will
be painful?

Doubtless, he said.

Then the intermediate state of rest will be pleasure and will
also be pain?

So it would seem.

But can that which is neither become both?

I should say not.

And both pleasure and pain are motions of the soul, are they not?

Yes.

But that which is neither was just now shown to be rest and not motion,
and in a mean between them?

Yes.

How, then, can we be right in supposing that the absence of pain
is pleasure, or that the absence of pleasure is pain?

Impossible.

This then is an appearance only and not a reality; that is tc say,
the rest is pleasure at the moment and in comparison of what
is painful, and painful in comparison of what is pleasant;
but all these representations, when tried by the test of true pleasure,
are not real but a sort of imposition?

That is the inference.

Look at the other class of pleasures which have no antecedent pains
and you will no longer suppose, as you perhaps may at present,
that pleasure is only the cessation of pain, or pain of pleasure.

What are they, he said, and where shall I find them?

There are many of them:  take as an example the pleasures, of smell,
which are very great and have no antecedent pains; they come in a moment,
and when they depart leave no pain behind them.

Most true, he said.

Let us not, then, be induced to believe that pure pleasure
is the cessation of pain, or pain of pleasure.

No.

Still, the more numerous and violent pleasures which reach the soul
through the body are generally of this sort--they are reliefs
of pain.

That is true.

And the anticipations of future pleasures and pains are of a like nature?

Yes.

Shall I give you an illustration of them?

Let me hear.

You would allow, I said, that there is in nature an upper and lower
and middle region?

I should.

And if a person were to go from the lower to the middle region,
would he not imagine that he is going up; and he who is standing
in the middle and sees whence he has come, would imagine that he
is already in the upper region, if he has never seen the true
upper world?

To be sure, he said; how can he think otherwise?

But if he were taken back again he would imagine, and truly imagine,
that he was descending?

No doubt.

All that would arise out of his ignorance of the true upper
and middle and lower regions?

Yes.

Then can you wonder that persons who are inexperienced in the truth,
as they have wrong ideas about many other things, should also have
wrong ideas about pleasure and pain and the intermediate state;
so that when they are only being drawn towards the painful they
feel pain and think the pain which they experience to be real,
and in like manner, when drawn away from pain to the neutral
or intermediate state, they firmly believe that they have reached
the goal of satiety and pleasure; they, not knowing pleasure,
err in contrasting pain with the absence of pain.  which is like
contrasting black with grey instead of white--can you wonder, I say,
at this?

No, indeed; I should be much more disposed to wonder at the opposite.

Look at the matter thus:--Hunger, thirst, and the like, are inanitions
of the bodily state?

Yes.

And ignorance and folly are inanitions of the soul?

True.

And food and wisdom are the corresponding satisfactions of either?

Certainly.

And is the satisfaction derived from that which has less or from
that which has more existence the truer?

Clearly, from that which has more.

What classes of things have a greater share of pure existence in
your judgment--those of which food and drink and condiments and all
kinds of sustenance are examples, or the class which contains true
opinion and knowledge and mind and all the different kinds of virtue? 
Put the question in this way:--Which has a more pure being--
that which is concerned with the invariable, the immortal,
and the true, and is of such a nature, and is found in such natures;
or that which is concerned with and found in the variable and mortal,
and is itself variable and mortal?

Far purer, he replied, is the being of that which is concerned
with the invariable.

And does the essence of the invariable partake of knowledge
in the same degree as of essence?

Yes, of knowledge in the same degree.

And of truth in the same degree?

Yes.

And, conversely, that which has less of truth will also have less
of essence?

Necessarily.

Then, in general, those kinds of things which are in the service
of the body have less of truth and essence than those which are
in the service of the soul?

Far less.

And has not the body itself less of truth and essence than the soul?

Yes.

What is filled with more real existence, and actually has a more
real existence, is more really filled than that which is filled
with less real existence and is less real?

Of course.

And if there be a pleasure in being filled with that which is
according to nature, that which is more really filled with more
real being will more really and truly enjoy true pleasure;
whereas that which participates in less real being will be less
truly and surely satisfied, and will participate in an illusory
and less real pleasure?

Unquestionably.

Those then who know not wisdom and virtue, and are always busy with
gluttony and sensuality, go down and up again as far as the mean;
and in this region they move at random throughout life, but they
never pass into the true upper world; thither they neither look,
nor do they ever find their way, neither are they truly filled
with true being, nor do they taste of pure and abiding pleasure. 
Like cattle, with their eyes always looking down and their heads
stooping to the earth, that is, to the dining-table, they fatten
and feed and breed, and, in their excessive love of these delights,
they kick and butt at one another with horns and hoofs which are made
of iron; and they kill one another by reason of their insatiable lust. 
For they fill themselves with that which is not substantial,
and the part of themselves which they fill is also unsubstantial
and incontinent.

Verily, Socrates, said Glaucon, you describe the life of the many
like an oracle.

Their pleasures are mixed with pains--how can they be otherwise? 
For they are mere shadows and pictures of the true, and are coloured
by contrast, which exaggerates both light and shade, and so they
implant in the minds of fools insane desires of themselves; and they
are fought about as Stesichorus says that the Greeks fought about
the shadow of Helen at Troy in ignorance of the truth.

Something of that sort must inevitably happen.

And must not the like happen with the spirited or passionate
element of the soul?  Will not the passionate man who carries his
passion into action, be in the like case, whether he is envious
and ambitious, or violent and contentious, or angry and discontented,
if he be seeking to attain honour and victory and the satisfaction
of his anger without reason or sense?

Yes, he said, the same will happen with the spirited element also.

Then may we not confidently assert that the lovers of money and honour,
when they seek their pleasures under the guidance and in the company
of reason and knowledge, and pursue after and win the pleasures which
wisdom shows them, will also have the truest pleasures in the highest
degree which is attainable to them, inasmuch as they follow truth;
and they will have the pleasures which are natural to them,
if that which is best for each one is also most natural to him?

Yes, certainly; the best is the most natural.

And when the whole soul follows the philosophical principle,
and there is no division, the several parts are just, and do each
of them their own business, and enjoy severally the best and truest
pleasures of which they are capable?

Exactly.

But when either of the two other principles prevails, it fails
in attaining its own pleasure, and compels the rest to pursue
after a pleasure which is a shadow only and which is not their own?

True.

And the greater the interval which separates them from philosophy
and reason, the more strange and illusive will be the pleasure?

Yes.

And is not that farthest from reason which is at the greatest
distance from law and order?

Clearly.

And the lustful and tyrannical desires are, as we saw,
at the greatest distance?  Yes.

And the royal and orderly desires are nearest?

Yes.

Then the tyrant will live at the greatest distance from true
or natural pleasure, and the king at the least?

Certainly.

But if so, the tyrant will live most unpleasantly, and the king
most pleasantly?

Inevitably.

Would you know the measure of the interval which separates them?

Will you tell me?

There appear to be three pleasures, one genuine and two spurious: 
now the transgression of the tyrant reaches a point beyond the spurious;
he has run away from the region of law and reason, and taken up
his abode with certain slave pleasures which are his satellites,
and the measure of his inferiority can only be expressed in
a figure.

How do you mean?

I assume, I said, that the tyrant is in the third place from the oligarch;
the democrat was in the middle?

Yes.

And if there is truth in what has preceded, he will be wedded
to an image of pleasure which is thrice removed as to truth
from the pleasure of the oligarch?

He will.

And the oligarch is third from the royal; since we count as one
royal and aristocratical?

Yes, he is third.

Then the tyrant is removed from true pleasure by the space
of a number which is three times three?

Manifestly.

The shadow then of tyrannical pleasure determined by the number
of length will be a plane figure.

Certainly.

And if you raise the power and make the plane a solid, there is no
difficulty in seeing how vast is the interval by which the tyrant
is parted from the king.

Yes; the arithmetician will easily do the sum.

Or if some person begins at the other end and measures the interval
by which the king is parted from the tyrant in truth of pleasure,
he will find him, when the multiplication is complete, living 729
times more pleasantly, and the tyrant more painfully by this
same interval.

What a wonderful calculation!  And how enormous is the distance
which separates the just from the unjust in regard to pleasure
and pain!

Yet a true calculation, I said, and a number which nearly concerns
human life, if human beings are concerned with days and nights
and months and years.

Yes, he said, human life is certainly concerned with them.

Then if the good and just man be thus superior in pleasure
to the evil and unjust, his superiority will be infinitely
greater in propriety of life and in beauty and virtue?

Immeasurably greater.

Well, I said, and now having arrived at this stage of the argument,
we may revert to the words which brought us hither:  Was not some
one saying that injustice was a gain to the perfectly unjust who was
reputed to be just?

Yes, that was said.

Now then, having determined the power and quality of justice
and injustice, let us have a little conversation with him.

What shall we say to him?

Let us make an image of the soul, that he may have his own words
presented before his eyes.

Of what sort?

An ideal image of the soul, like the composite creations of
ancient mythology, such as the Chimera or Scylla or Cerberus,
and there are many others in which two or more different natures
are said to grow into one.

There are said of have been such unions.

Then do you now model the form of a multitudinous, many-headed monster,
having a ring of heads of all manner of beasts, tame and wild,
which he is able to generate and metamorphose at will.

You suppose marvellous powers in the artist; but, as language
is more pliable than wax or any similar substance, let there
be such a model as you propose.

Suppose now that you make a second form as of a lion, and a third
of a man, the second smaller than the first, and the third smaller
than the second.

That, he said, is an easier task; and I have made them as you say.

And now join them, and let the three grow into one.

That has been accomplished.

Next fashion the outside of them into a single image, as of a man,
so that he who is not able to look within, and sees only the outer hull,
may believe the beast to be a single human creature.  I have done so,
he said.

And now, to him who maintains that it is profitable for the human
creature to be unjust, and unprofitable to be just, let us reply that,
if he be right, it is profitable for this creature to feast the
multitudinous monster and strengthen the lion and the lion-like qualities,
but to starve and weaken the man, who is consequently liable to be
dragged about at the mercy of either of the other two; and he is
not to attempt to familiarize or harmonize them with one another--
he ought rather to suffer them to fight and bite and devour one another.

Certainly, he said; that is what the approver of injustice says.

To him the supporter of justice makes answer that he should ever
so speak and act as to give the man within him in some way or other
the most complete mastery over the entire human creature.

He should watch over the many-headed monster like a good husbandman,
fostering and cultivating the gentle qualities, and preventing the wild
ones from growing; he should be making the lion-heart his ally,
and in common care of them all should be uniting the several parts
with one another and with himself.

Yes, he said, that is quite what the maintainer of justice say.

And so from every point of view, whether of pleasure, honour,
or advantage, the approver of justice is right and speaks the truth,
and the disapprover is wrong and false and ignorant.

Yes, from every point of view.

Come, now, and let us gently reason with the unjust, who is not
intentionally in error.  `Sweet Sir,' we will say to him, what think
you of things esteemed noble and ignoble?  Is not the noble that
which subjects the beast to the man, or rather to the god in man;
and the ignoble that which subjects the man to the beast?' 
He can hardly avoid saying yes--can he now?

Not if he has any regard for my opinion.

But, if he agree so far, we may ask him to answer another question: 
`Then how would a man profit if he received gold and silver
on the condition that he was to enslave the noblest part of him
to the worst?  Who can imagine that a man who sold his son
or daughter into slavery for money, especially if he sold them
into the hands of fierce and evil men, would be the gainer,
however large might be the sum which he received?  And will any
one say that he is not a miserable caitiff who remorselessly sells
his own divine being to that which is most godless and detestable? 
Eriphyle took the necklace as the price of her husband's life,
but he is taking a bribe in order to compass a worse ruin.'

Yes, said Glaucon, far worse--I will answer for him.

Has not the intemperate been censured of old, because in him
the huge multiform monster is allowed to be too much at large?

Clearly.

And men are blamed for pride and bad temper when the lion and serpent
element in them disproportionately grows and gains strength?

Yes.

And luxury and softness are blamed, because they relax and weaken
this same creature, and make a coward of him?

Very true.

And is not a man reproached for flattery and meanness who subordinates
the spirited animal to the unruly monster, and, for the sake of money,
of which he can never have enough, habituates him in the days
of his youth to be trampled in the mire, and from being a lion
to become a monkey?

True, he said.

And why are mean employments and manual arts a reproach Only
because they imply a natural weakness of the higher principle;
the individual is unable to control the creatures within him,
but has to court them, and his great study is how to flatter them.

Such appears to be the reason.

And therefore, being desirous of placing him under a rule like that
of the best, we say that he ought to be the servant of the best,
in whom the Divine rules; not, as Thrasymachus supposed, to the
injury of the servant, but because every one had better be ruled
by divine wisdom dwelling within him; or, if this be impossible,
then by an external authority, in order that we may be all,
as far as possible, under the same government, friends and equals.

True, he said.

And this is clearly seen to be the intention of the law, which is
the ally of the whole city; and is seen also in the authority
which we exercise over children, and the refusal to let them
be free until we have established in them a principle analogous
to the constitution of a state, and by cultivation of this higher
element have set up in their hearts a guardian and ruler like our own,
and when this is done they may go their ways.

Yes, he said, the purpose of the law is manifest.

From what point of view, then, and on what ground can we say that
a man is profited by injustice or intemperance or other baseness,
which will make him a worse man, even though he acquire money
or power by his wickedness?

From no point of view at all.

What shall he profit, if his injustice be undetected and unpunished? 
He who is undetected only gets worse, whereas he who is detected
and punished has the brutal part of his nature silenced and humanized;
the gentler element in him is liberated, and his whole soul is
perfected and ennobled by the acquirement of justice and temperance
and wisdom, more than the body ever is by receiving gifts of beauty,
strength and health, in proportion as the soul is more honourable than
the body.

Certainly, he said.

To this nobler purpose the man of understanding will devote
the energies of his life.  And in the first place, he will honour
studies which impress these qualities on his soul and disregard others?

Clearly, he said.

In the next place, he will regulate his bodily habit and training,
and so far will he be from yielding to brutal and irrational pleasures,
that he will regard even health as quite a secondary matter;
his first object will be not that he may be fair or strong or well,
unless he is likely thereby to gain temperance, but he will always
desire so to attemper the body as to preserve the harmony of
the soul?

Certainly he will, if he has true music in him.

And in the acquisition of wealth there is a principle of order
and harmony which he will also observe; he will not allow himself
to be dazzled by the foolish applause of the world, and heap up
riches to his own infinite harm?

Certainly not, he said.

He will look at the city which is within him, and take heed that no
disorder occur in it, such as might arise either from superfluity
or from want; and upon this principle he will regulate his property
and gain or spend according to his means.

Very true.

And, for the same reason, he will gladly accept and enjoy such
honours as he deems likely to make him a better man; but those,
whether private or public, which are likely to disorder his life,
he will avoid?

Then, if that is his motive, he will not be a statesman.

By the dog of Egypt, he will! in the city which is his own he
certainly will, though in the land of his birth perhaps not,
unless he have a divine call.

I understand; you mean that he will be a ruler in the city
of which we are the founders, and which exists in idea only;
for I do not believe that there is such an one anywhere on earth?

In heaven, I replied, there is laid up a pattern of it, methinks, which he
who desires may behold, and beholding, may set his own house in order. 
But whether such an one exists, or ever will exist in fact,
is no matter; for he will live after the manner of that city,
having nothing to do with any other.

I think so, he said.

BOOK X

SOCRATES - GLAUCON

OF THE many excellences which I perceive in the order of our State,
there is none which upon reflection pleases me better than the rule
about poetry.

To what do you refer?

To the rejection of imitative poetry, which certainly ought
not to be received; as I see far more clearly now that the parts
of the soul have been distinguished.

What do you mean?

Speaking in confidence, for I should not like to have my words
repeated to the tragedians and the rest of the imitative tribe--
but I do not mind saying to you, that all poetical imitations are
ruinous to the understanding of the hearers, and that the knowledge
of their true nature is the only antidote to them.

Explain the purport of your remark.

Well, I will tell you, although I have always from my earliest youth
had an awe and love of Homer, which even now makes the words falter
on my lips, for he is the great captain and teacher of the whole
of that charming tragic company; but a man is not to be reverenced
more than the truth, and therefore I will speak out.

Very good, he said.

Listen to me then, or rather, answer me.

Put your question.

Can you tell me what imitation is? for I really do not know.

A likely thing, then, that I should know.

Why not? for the duller eye may often see a thing sooner than
the keener.

Very true, he said; but in your presence, even if I had any faint notion,
I could not muster courage to utter it.  Will you enquire yourself?

Well then, shall we begin the enquiry in our usual manner: 
Whenever a number of individuals have a common name, we assume them
to have also a corresponding idea or form.  Do you understand me?

I do.

Let us take any common instance; there are beds and tables in the world--
plenty of them, are there not?

Yes.

But there are only two ideas or forms of them--one the idea of a bed,
the other of a table.

True.

And the maker of either of them makes a bed or he makes a table for our use,
in accordance with the idea--that is our way of speaking in this
and similar instances--but no artificer makes the ideas themselves: 
how could he?

Impossible.

And there is another artist,--I should like to know what you would
say of him.

Who is he?

One who is the maker of all the works of all other workmen.

What an extraordinary man!

Wait a little, and there will be more reason for your saying so. 
For this is he who is able to make not only vessels of every kind,
but plants and animals, himself and all other things--the earth
and heaven, and the things which are in heaven or under the earth;
he makes the gods also.

He must be a wizard and no mistake.

Oh! you are incredulous, are you?  Do you mean that there is no
such maker or creator, or that in one sense there might be a maker
of all these things but in another not?  Do you see that there
is a way in which you could make them all yourself?

What way?

An easy way enough; or rather, there are many ways in which the feat
might be quickly and easily accomplished, none quicker than that of
turning a mirror round and round--you would soon enough make the sun
and the heavens, and the earth and yourself, and other animals and plants,
and all the, other things of which we were just now speaking, in the mirror.

Yes, he said; but they would be appearances only.

Very good, I said, you are coming to the point now.  And the painter
too is, as I conceive, just such another--a creator of appearances,
is he not?

Of course.

But then I suppose you will say that what he creates is untrue. 
And yet there is a sense in which the painter also creates a bed?

Yes, he said, but not a real bed.

And what of the maker of the bed?  Were you not saying that he too makes,
not the idea which, according to our view, is the essence of the bed,
but only a particular bed?

Yes, I did.

Then if he does not make that which exists he cannot make true existence,
but only some semblance of existence; and if any one were to say
that the work of the maker of the bed, or of any other workman,
has real existence, he could hardly be supposed to be speaking
the truth.

At any rate, he replied, philosophers would say that he was not
speaking the truth.

No wonder, then, that his work too is an indistinct expression
of truth.

No wonder.

Suppose now that by the light of the examples just offered we
enquire who this imitator is?

If you please.

Well then, here are three beds:  one existing in nature, which is made
by God, as I think that we may say--for no one else can be the maker?

No.

There is another which is the work of the carpenter?

Yes.

And the work of the painter is a third?

Yes.

Beds, then, are of three kinds, and there are three artists
who superintend them:  God, the maker of the bed, and the painter?

Yes, there are three of them.

God, whether from choice or from necessity, made one bed in nature
and one only; two or more such ideal beds neither ever have been
nor ever will be made by God.

Why is that?

Because even if He had made but two, a third would still appear
behind them which both of them would have for their idea,
and that would be the ideal bed and the two others.

Very true, he said.

God knew this, and He desired to be the real maker of a real bed,
not a particular maker of a particular bed, and therefore He created
a bed which is essentially and by nature one only.

So we believe.

Shall we, then, speak of Him as the natural author or maker of the bed?

Yes, he replied; inasmuch as by the natural process of creation He
is the author of this and of all other things.

And what shall we say of the carpenter--is not he also the maker
of the bed?

Yes.

But would you call the painter a creator and maker?

Certainly not.

Yet if he is not the maker, what is he in relation to the bed?

I think, he said, that we may fairly designate him as the imitator
of that which the others make.

Good, I said; then you call him who is third in the descent from
nature an imitator?

Certainly, he said.

And the tragic poet is an imitator, and therefore, like all
other imitators, he is thrice removed from the king and from the truth?

That appears to be so.

Then about the imitator we are agreed.  And what about the painter?--
I would like to know whether he may be thought to imitate that which
originally exists in nature, or only the creations of artists?

The latter.

As they are or as they appear?  You have still to determine this.

What do you mean?

I mean, that you may look at a bed from different points of view,
obliquely or directly or from any other point of view, and the bed
will appear different, but there is no difference in reality. 
And the same of all things.

Yes, he said, the difference is only apparent.

Now let me ask you another question:  Which is the art of painting
designed to be--an imitation of things as they are, or as they appear--
of appearance or of reality?

Of appearance.

Then the imitator, I said, is a long way off the truth, and can
do all things because he lightly touches on a small part of them,
and that part an image.  For example:  A painter will paint a cobbler,
carpenter, or any other artist, though he knows nothing of their arts;
and, if he is a good artist, he may deceive children or simple persons,
when he shows them his picture of a carpenter from a distance,
and they will fancy that they are looking at a real carpenter.

Certainly.

And whenever any one informs us that he has found a man knows
all the arts, and all things else that anybody knows, and every
single thing with a higher degree of accuracy than any other man--
whoever tells us this, I think that we can only imagine to be a
simple creature who is likely to have been deceived by some wizard
or actor whom he met, and whom he thought all-knowing, because he
himself was unable to analyse the nature of knowledge and ignorance
and imitation.

Most true.

And so, when we hear persons saying that the tragedians, and Homer,
who is at their head, know all the arts and all things human,
virtue as well as vice, and divine things too, for that the good
poet cannot compose well unless he knows his subject, and that he
who has not this knowledge can never be a poet, we ought to
consider whether here also there may not be a similar illusion. 
Perhaps they may have come across imitators and been deceived by them;
they may not have remembered when they saw their works that these were
but imitations thrice removed from the truth, and could easily be made
without any knowledge of the truth, because they are appearances
only and not realities?  Or, after all, they may be in the right,
and poets do really know the things about which they seem to the many
to speak so well?

The question, he said, should by all means be considered.

Now do you suppose that if a person were able to make the original
as well as the image, he would seriously devote himself to the
image-making branch?  Would he allow imitation to be the ruling
principle of his life, as if he had nothing higher in him?

I should say not.

The real artist, who knew what he was imitating, would be interested
in realities and not in imitations; and would desire to leave
as memorials of himself works many and fair; and, instead of being
the author of encomiums, he would prefer to be the theme of them.

Yes, he said, that would be to him a source of much greater honour
and profit.

Then, I said, we must put a question to Homer; not about medicine,
or any of the arts to which his poems only incidentally refer: 
we are not going to ask him, or any other poet, whether he has cured
patients like Asclepius, or left behind him a school of medicine
such as the Asclepiads were, or whether he only talks about medicine
and other arts at second hand; but we have a right to know respecting
military tactics, politics, education, which are the chiefest and
noblest subjects of his poems, and we may fairly ask him about them. 
`Friend Homer,' then we say to him, `if you are only in the second
remove from truth in what you say of virtue, and not in the third--
not an image maker or imitator--and if you are able to discern
what pursuits make men better or worse in private or public life,
tell us what State was ever better governed by your help? 
The good order of Lacedaemon is due to Lycurgus, and many other
cities great and small have been similarly benefited by others;
but who says that you have been a good legislator to them and
have done them any good?  Italy and Sicily boast of Charondas,
and there is Solon who is renowned among us; but what city
has anything to say about you?'  Is there any city which he
might name?

I think not, said Glaucon; not even the Homerids themselves pretend
that he was a legislator.

Well, but is there any war on record which was carried on successfully
by him, or aided by his counsels, when he was alive?

There is not.

Or is there any invention of his, applicable to the arts or to
human life, such as Thales the Milesian or Anacharsis the Scythian,
and other ingenious men have conceived, which is attributed to him?

There is absolutely nothing of the kind.

But, if Homer never did any public service, was he privately
a guide or teacher of any?  Had he in his lifetime friends
who loved to associate with him, and who handed down to posterity
an Homeric way of life, such as was established by Pythagoras
who was so greatly beloved for his wisdom, and whose followers
are to this day quite celebrated for the order which was named after him?

Nothing of the kind is recorded of him.  For surely, Socrates, Creophylus,
the companion of Homer, that child of flesh, whose name always makes us laugh,
might be more justly ridiculed for his stupidity, if, as is said, Homer
was greatly neglected by him and others in his own day when he was alive?

Yes, I replied, that is the tradition.  But can you imagine, Glaucon,
that if Homer had really been able to educate and improve mankind--
if he had possessed knowledge and not been a mere imitator--can you imagine,
I say, that he would not have had many followers, and been honoured
and loved by them?  Protagoras of Abdera, and Prodicus of Ceos,
and a host of others, have only to whisper to their contemporaries: 
`You will never be able to manage either your own house or your own
State until you appoint us to be your ministers of education'--
and this ingenious device of theirs has such an effect in making
them love them that their companions all but carry them about on
their shoulders.  And is it conceivable that the contemporaries
of Homer, or again of Hesiod, would have allowed either of them
to go about as rhapsodists, if they had really been able to make
mankind virtuous?  Would they not have been as unwilling to part
with them as with gold, and have compelled them to stay at home
with them?  Or, if the master would not stay, then the disciples
would have followed him about everywhere, until they had got
education enough?

Yes, Socrates, that, I think, is quite true.

Then must we not infer that all these poetical individuals,
beginning with Homer, are only imitators; they copy images
of virtue and the like, but the truth they never reach?  The poet
is like a painter who, as we have already observed, will make
a likeness of a cobbler though he understands nothing of cobbling;
and his picture is good enough for those who know no more than he does,
and judge only by colours and figures.

Quite so.

In like manner the poet with his words and phrases may be said
to lay on the colours of the several arts, himself understanding
their nature only enough to imitate them; and other people,
who are as ignorant as he is, and judge only from his words,
imagine that if he speaks of cobbling, or of military tactics,
or of anything else, in metre and harmony and rhythm, he speaks very well--
such is the sweet influence which melody and rhythm by nature have. 
And I think that you must have observed again and again what a poor
appearance the tales of poets make when stripped of the colours which
music puts upon them, and recited in simple prose.

Yes, he said.

They are like faces which were never really beautiful, but only blooming;
and now the bloom of youth has passed away from them?

Exactly.

Here is another point:  The imitator or maker of the image
knows nothing of true existence; he knows appearances only. 
Am I not right?

Yes.

Then let us have a clear understanding, and not be satisfied
with half an explanation.

Proceed.

Of the painter we say that he will paint reins, and he will paint
a bit?

Yes.

And the worker in leather and brass will make them?

Certainly.

But does the painter know the right form of the bit and reins? 
Nay, hardly even the workers in brass and leather who make them;
only the horseman who knows how to use them--he knows their
right form.

Most true.

And may we not say the same of all things?

What?

That there are three arts which are concerned with all things: 
one which uses, another which makes, a third which imitates them?

Yes.

And the excellence or beauty or truth of every structure,
animate or inanimate, and of every action of man, is relative
to the use for which nature or the artist has intended them.

True.

Then the user of them must have the greatest experience of them,
and he must indicate to the maker the good or bad qualities which
develop themselves in use; for example, the flute-player will tell
the flute-maker which of his flutes is satisfactory to the performer;
he will tell him how he ought to make them, and the other will attend
to his instructions?

Of course.

The one knows and therefore speaks with authority about the goodness
and badness of flutes, while the other, confiding in him,
will do what he is told by him?

True.

The instrument is the same, but about the excellence or badness
of it the maker will only attain to a correct belief; and this he
will gain from him who knows, by talking to him and being compelled
to hear what he has to say, whereas the user will have knowledge?

True.

But will the imitator have either?  Will he know from use whether
or no his drawing is correct or beautiful?  Or will he have right
opinion from being compelled to associate with another who knows
and gives him instructions about what he should draw?

Neither.

Then he will no more have true opinion than he will have knowledge
about the goodness or badness of his imitations?

I suppose not.

The imitative artist will be in a brilliant state of intelligence
about his own creations?

Nay, very much the reverse.

And still he will go on imitating without knowing what makes
a thing good or bad, and may be expected therefore to imitate
only that which appears to be good to the ignorant multitude?

Just so.

Thus far then we are pretty well agreed that the imitator has no
knowledge worth mentioning of what he imitates.  Imitation is only
a kind of play or sport, and the tragic poets, whether they write
in iambic or in Heroic verse, are imitators in the highest degree?

Very true.

And now tell me, I conjure you, has not imitation been shown by us
to be concerned with that which is thrice removed from the truth?

Certainly.

And what is the faculty in man to which imitation is addressed?

What do you mean?

I will explain:  The body which is large when seen near,
appears small when seen at a distance?

True.

And the same object appears straight when looked at out of the water,
and crooked when in the water; and the concave becomes convex,
owing to the illusion about colours to which the sight is liable. 
Thus every sort of confusion is revealed within us; and this is
that weakness of the human mind on which the art of conjuring and of
deceiving by light and shadow and other ingenious devices imposes,
having an effect upon us like magic.

True.

And the arts of measuring and numbering and weighing come to
the rescue of the human understanding-there is the beauty of them--
and the apparent greater or less, or more or heavier, no longer
have the mastery over us, but give way before calculation and measure
and weight?

Most true.

And this, surely, must be the work of the calculating and rational
principle in the soul

To be sure.

And when this principle measures and certifies that some things
are equal, or that some are greater or less than others, there occurs
an apparent contradiction?

True.

But were we not saying that such a contradiction is the same faculty
cannot have contrary opinions at the same time about the same thing?

Very true.

Then that part of the soul which has an opinion contrary to measure
is not the same with that which has an opinion in accordance
with measure?

True.

And the better part of the soul is likely to be that which trusts
to measure and calculation?

Certainly.

And that which is opposed to them is one of the inferior principles
of the soul?

No doubt.

This was the conclusion at which I was seeking to arrive when I
said that painting or drawing, and imitation in general, when doing
their own proper work, are far removed from truth, and the companions
and friends and associates of a principle within us which is equally
removed from reason, and that they have no true or healthy aim.

Exactly.

The imitative art is an inferior who marries an inferior, and has
inferior offspring.

Very true.

And is this confined to the sight only, or does it extend
to the hearing also, relating in fact to what we term poetry?

Probably the same would be true of poetry.

Do not rely, I said, on a probability derived from the analogy
of painting; but let us examine further and see whether the faculty
with which poetical imitation is concerned is good or bad.

By all means.

We may state the question thus:--Imitation imitates the actions of men,
whether voluntary or involuntary, on which, as they imagine, a good
or bad result has ensued, and they rejoice or sorrow accordingly. 
Is there anything more?

No, there is nothing else.

But in all this variety of circumstances is the man at unity
with himself--or rather, as in the instance of sight there was
confusion and opposition in his opinions about the same things,
so here also is there not strife and inconsistency in his life? 
Though I need hardly raise the question again, for I remember that all
this has been already admitted; and the soul has been acknowledged
by us to be full of these and ten thousand similar oppositions
occurring at the same moment?

And we were right, he said.

Yes, I said, thus far we were right; but there was an omission
which must now be supplied.

What was the omission?

Were we not saying that a good man, who has the misfortune to lose
his son or anything else which is most dear to him, will bear
the loss with more equanimity than another?

Yes.

But will he have no sorrow, or shall we say that although he cannot
help sorrowing, he will moderate his sorrow?

The latter, he said, is the truer statement.

Tell me:  will he be more likely to struggle and hold out against
his sorrow when he is seen by his equals, or when he is alone?

It will make a great difference whether he is seen or not.

When he is by himself he will not mind saying or doing many things
which he would be ashamed of any one hearing or seeing him do?

True.

There is a principle of law and reason in him which bids him resist,
as well as a feeling of his misfortune which is forcing him to indulge
his sorrow?

True.

But when a man is drawn in two opposite directions, to and
from the same object, this, as we affirm, necessarily implies
two distinct principles in him?

Certainly.

One of them is ready to follow the guidance of the law?

How do you mean?

The law would say that to be patient under suffering is best,
and that we should not give way to impatience, as there is no
knowing whether such things are good or evil; and nothing is gained
by impatience; also, because no human thing is of serious importance,
and grief stands in the way of that which at the moment is most required.

What is most required? he asked.

That we should take counsel about what has happened, and when
the dice have been thrown order our affairs in the way which reason
deems best; not, like children who have had a fall, keeping hold
of the part struck and wasting time in setting up a howl, but always
accustoming the soul forthwith to apply a remedy, raising up that
which is sickly and fallen, banishing the cry of sorrow by the healing art.

Yes, he said, that is the true way of meeting the attacks of fortune.

Yes, I said; and the higher principle is ready to follow this
suggestion of reason?

Clearly.

And the other principle, which inclines us to recollection of our
troubles and to lamentation, and can never have enough of them,
we may call irrational, useless, and cowardly?

Indeed, we may.

And does not the latter--I mean the rebellious principle--
furnish a great variety of materials for imitation?  Whereas the wise
and calm temperament, being always nearly equable, is not easy
to imitate or to appreciate when imitated, especially at a public
festival when a promiscuous crowd is assembled in a theatre. 
For the feeling represented is one to which they are strangers.

Certainly.

Then the imitative poet who aims at being popular is not by nature made,
nor is his art intended, to please or to affect the principle
in the soul; but he will prefer the passionate and fitful temper,
which is easily imitated?

Clearly.

And now we may fairly take him and place him by the side of the painter,
for he is like him in two ways:  first, inasmuch as his creations
have an inferior degree of truth--in this, I say, he is like him;
and he is also like him in being concerned with an inferior
part of the soul; and therefore we shall be right in refusing
to admit him into a well-ordered State, because he awakens and
nourishes and strengthens the feelings and impairs the reason. 
As in a city when the evil are permitted to have authority
and the good are put out of the way, so in the soul of man,
as we maintain, the imitative poet implants an evil constitution,
for he indulges the irrational nature which has no discernment
of greater and less, but thinks the same thing at one time great
and at another small-he is a manufacturer of images and is very far
removed from the truth.

Exactly.

But we have not yet brought forward the heaviest count in our accusation:--
the power which poetry has of harming even the good (and there
are very few who are not harmed), is surely an awful thing?

Yes, certainly, if the effect is what you say.

Hear and judge:  The best of us, as I conceive, when we listen
to a passage of Homer, or one of the tragedians, in which he
represents some pitiful hero who is drawling out his sorrows in a
long oration, or weeping, and smiting his breast--the best of us,
you know, delight in giving way to sympathy, and are in raptures
at the excellence of the poet who stirs our feelings most.

Yes, of course I know.

But when any sorrow of our own happens to us, then you may observe
that we pride ourselves on the opposite quality--we would fain be quiet
and patient; this is the manly part, and the other which delighted
us in the recitation is now deemed to be the part of a woman.

Very true, he said.

Now can we be right in praising and admiring another who is doing
that which any one of us would abominate and be ashamed of in his
own person?

No, he said, that is certainly not reasonable.

Nay, I said, quite reasonable from one point of view.

What point of view?

If you consider, I said, that when in misfortune we feel a natural
hunger and desire to relieve our sorrow by weeping and lamentation,
and that this feeling which is kept under control in our own
calamities is satisfied and delighted by the poets;-the better
nature in each of us, not having been sufficiently trained
by reason or habit, allows the sympathetic element to break
loose because the sorrow is another's; and the spectator fancies
that there can be no disgrace to himself in praising and pitying
any one who comes telling him what a good man he is, and making
a fuss about his troubles; he thinks that the pleasure is a gain,
and why should he be supercilious and lose this and the poem too? 
Few persons ever reflect, as I should imagine, that from the evil
of other men something of evil is communicated to themselves. 
And so the feeling of sorrow which has gathered strength at the sight
of the misfortunes of others is with difficulty repressed in
our own.

How very true!

And does not the same hold also of the ridiculous?  There are jests
which you would be ashamed to make yourself, and yet on the comic stage,
or indeed in private, when you hear them, you are greatly amused
by them, and are not at all disgusted at their unseemliness;--
the case of pity is repeated;--there is a principle in human nature
which is disposed to raise a laugh, and this which you once restrained
by reason, because you were afraid of being thought a buffoon,
is now let out again; and having stimulated the risible faculty
at the theatre, you are betrayed unconsciously to yourself into
playing the comic poet at home.

Quite true, he said.

And the same may be said of lust and anger and all the other affections,
of desire and pain and pleasure, which are held to be inseparable
from every action--in all of them poetry feeds and waters the passions
instead of drying them up; she lets them rule, although they ought
to be controlled, if mankind are ever to increase in happiness and virtue.

I cannot deny it.

Therefore, Glaucon, I said, whenever you meet with any of the eulogists
of Homer declaring that he has been the educator of Hellas, and that he
is profitable for education and for the ordering of human things,
and that you should take him up again and again and get to know him
and regulate your whole life according to him, we may love and honour
those who say these things--they are excellent people, as far as
their lights extend; and we are ready to acknowledge that Homer is
the greatest of poets and first of tragedy writers; but we must remain
firm in our conviction that hymns to the gods and praises of famous
men are the only poetry which ought to be admitted into our State. 
For if you go beyond this and allow the honeyed muse to enter,
either in epic or lyric verse, not law and the reason of mankind,
which by common consent have ever been deemed best, but pleasure
and pain will be the rulers in our State.

That is most true, he said.

And now since we have reverted to the subject of poetry, let this
our defence serve to show the reasonableness of our former judgment
in sending away out of our State an art having the tendencies
which we have described; for reason constrained us.  But that she
may impute to us any harshness or want of politeness, let us tell
her that there is an ancient quarrel between philosophy and poetry;
of which there are many proofs, such as the saying of `the yelping
hound howling at her lord,' or of one `mighty in the vain talk
of fools,' and `the mob of sages circumventing Zeus,' and the `subtle
thinkers who are beggars after all'; and there are innumerable
other signs of ancient enmity between them.  Notwithstanding this,
let us assure our sweet friend and the sister arts of imitation
that if she will only prove her title to exist in a well-ordered
State we shall be delighted to receive her--we are very conscious
of her charms; but we may not on that account betray the truth. 
I dare say, Glaucon, that you are as much charmed by her as I am,
especially when she appears in Homer?

Yes, indeed, I am greatly charmed.

Shall I propose, then, that she be allowed to return from exile,
but upon this condition only--that she make a defence of herself
in lyrical or some other metre?

Certainly.

And we may further grant to those of her defenders who are lovers of poetry
and yet not poets the permission to speak in prose on her behalf: 
let them show not only that she is pleasant but also useful to
States and to human life, and we will listen in a kindly spirit;
for if this can be proved we shall surely be the gainers--I mean,
if there is a use in poetry as well as a delight?

Certainly, he said, we shall the gainers.

If her defence fails, then, my dear friend, like other persons
who are enamoured of something, but put a restraint upon themselves
when they think their desires are opposed to their interests,
so too must we after the manner of lovers give her up,
though not without a struggle.  We too are inspired by that love
of poetry which the education of noble States has implanted in us,
and therefore we would have her appear at her best and truest;
but so long as she is unable to make good her defence,
this argument of ours shall be a charm to us, which we will repeat
to ourselves while we listen to her strains; that we may not fall
away into the childish love of her which captivates the many. 
At all events we are well aware that poetry being such as we have
described is not to be regarded seriously as attaining to the truth;
and he who listens to her, fearing for the safety of the city which is
within him, should be on his guard against her seductions and make
our words his law.

Yes, he said, I quite agree with you.

Yes, I said, my dear Glaucon, for great is the issue at stake,
greater than appears, whether a man is to be good or bad. 
And what will any one be profited if under the influence of honour
or money or power, aye, or under the excitement of poetry, he neglect
justice and virtue?

Yes, he said; I have been convinced by the argument, as I believe
that any one else would have been.

And yet no mention has been made of the greatest prizes and rewards
which await virtue.

What, are there any greater still?  If there are, they must
be of an inconceivable greatness.

Why, I said, what was ever great in a short time?  The whole
period of threescore years and ten is surely but a little thing
in comparison with eternity?

Say rather `nothing,' he replied.

And should an immortal being seriously think of this little space
rather than of the whole?

Of the whole, certainly.  But why do you ask?

Are you not aware, I said, that the soul of man is immortal
and imperishable?

He looked at me in astonishment, and said:  No, by heaven: 
And are you really prepared to maintain this?

Yes, I said, I ought to be, and you too--there is no difficulty
in proving it.

I see a great difficulty; but I should like to hear you state this
argument of which you make so light.

Listen then.

I am attending.

There is a thing which you call good and another which you call evil?

Yes, he replied.

Would you agree with me in thinking that the corrupting and destroying
element is the evil, and the saving and improving element the good?

Yes.

And you admit that every thing has a good and also an evil;
as ophthalmia is the evil of the eyes and disease of the whole body;
as mildew is of corn, and rot of timber, or rust of copper and iron: 
in everything, or in almost everything, there is an inherent evil
and disease?

Yes, he said.

And anything which is infected by any of these evils is made evil,
and at last wholly dissolves and dies?

True.

The vice and evil which is inherent in each is the destruction of each;
and if this does not destroy them there is nothing else that will;
for good certainly will not destroy them, nor again, that which is
neither good nor evil.

Certainly not.

If, then, we find any nature which having this inherent corruption
cannot be dissolved or destroyed, we may be certain that of such
a nature there is no destruction?

That may be assumed.

Well, I said, and is there no evil which corrupts the soul?

Yes, he said, there are all the evils which we were just now passing
in review:  unrighteousness, intemperance, cowardice, ignorance.

But does any of these dissolve or destroy her?--and here do not let
us fall into the error of supposing that the unjust and foolish man,
when he is detected, perishes through his own injustice,
which is an evil of the soul.  Take the analogy of the body: 
The evil of the body is a disease which wastes and reduces and
annihilates the body; and all the things of which we were just
now speaking come to annihilation through their own corruption
attaching to them and inhering in them and so destroying them. 
Is not this true?

Yes.

Consider the soul in like manner.  Does the injustice or other evil
which exists in the soul waste and consume her?  Do they by attaching
to the soul and inhering in her at last bring her to death,
and so separate her from the body ?

Certainly not.

And yet, I said, it is unreasonable to suppose that anything can
perish from without through affection of external evil which could
not be destroyed from within by a corruption of its own?

It is, he replied.

Consider, I said, Glaucon, that even the badness of food,
whether staleness, decomposition, or any other bad quality,
when confined to the actual food, is not supposed to destroy the body;
although, if the badness of food communicates corruption to the body,
then we should say that the body has been destroyed by a corruption
of itself, which is disease, brought on by this; but that the body,
being one thing, can be destroyed by the badness of food,
which is another, and which does not engender any natural infection--
this we shall absolutely deny?

Very true.

And, on the same principle, unless some bodily evil can produce an evil
of the soul, we must not suppose that the soul, which is one thing,
can be dissolved by any merely external evil which belongs to another?

Yes, he said, there is reason in that.

Either then, let us refute this conclusion, or, while it
remains unrefuted, let us never say that fever, or any other disease,
or the knife put to the throat, or even the cutting up of
the whole body into the minutest pieces, can destroy the soul,
until she herself is proved to become more unholy or unrighteous
in consequence of these things being done to the body; but that
the soul, or anything else if not destroyed by an internal evil,
can be destroyed by an external one, is not to.  be affirmed by any man.

And surely, he replied, no one will ever prove that the souls
of men become more unjust in consequence of death.

But if some one who would rather not admit the immortality of the soul
boldly denies this, and says that the dying do really become more
evil and unrighteous, then, if the speaker is right, I suppose
that injustice, like disease, must be assumed to be fatal to the unjust,
and that those who take this disorder die by the natural inherent
power of destruction which evil has, and which kills them sooner
or later, but in quite another way from that in which, at present,
the wicked receive death at the hands of others as the penalty
of their deeds?

Nay, he said, in that case injustice, if fatal to the unjust,
will not be so very terrible to him, for he will be delivered
from evil.  But I rather suspect the opposite to be the truth,
and that injustice which, if it have the power, will murder others,
keeps the murderer alive--aye, and well awake too; so far removed is
her dwelling-place from being a house of death.

True, I said; if the inherent natural vice or evil of the soul is
unable to kill or destroy her, hardly will that which is appointed
to be the destruction of some other body, destroy a soul or anything
else except that of which it was appointed to be the destruction.

Yes, that can hardly be.

But the soul which cannot be destroyed by an evil, whether inherent
or external, must exist for ever, and if existing for ever,
must be immortal?

Certainly.

That is the conclusion, I said; and, if a true conclusion,
then the souls must always be the same, for if none be destroyed
they will not diminish in number.  Neither will they increase,
for the increase of the immortal natures must come from something mortal,
and all things would thus end in immortality.

Very true.

But this we cannot believe--reason will not allow us--
any more than we can believe the soul, in her truest nature,
to be full of variety and difference and dissimilarity.

What do you mean? he said.

The soul, I said, being, as is now proven, immortal, must be
the fairest of compositions and cannot be compounded of many elements?

Certainly not.

Her immortality is demonstrated by the previous argument, and there
are many other proofs; but to see her as she really is, not as we
now behold her, marred by communion with the body and other miseries,
you must contemplate her with the eye of reason, in her original purity;
and then her beauty will be revealed, and justice and injustice and all
the things which we have described will be manifested more clearly. 
Thus far, we have spoken the truth concerning her as she appears
at present, but we must remember also that we have seen her only
in a condition which may be compared to that of the sea-god Glaucus,
whose original image can hardly be discerned because his natural
members are broken off and crushed and damaged by the waves in all
sorts of ways, and incrustations have grown over them of seaweed
and shells and stones, so that he is more like some monster
than he is to his own natural form.  And the soul which we behold
is in a similar condition, disfigured by ten thousand ills. 
But not there, Glaucon, not there must we look.

Where then?

At her love of wisdom.  Let us see whom she affects, and what
society and converse she seeks in virtue of her near kindred
with the immortal and eternal and divine; also how different
she would become if wholly following this superior principle,
and borne by a divine impulse out of the ocean in which she now is,
and disengaged from the stones and shells and things of earth
and rock which in wild variety spring up around her because she
feeds upon earth, and is overgrown by the good things of this life
as they are termed:  then you would see her as she is, and know
whether she has one shape only or many, or what her nature is. 
Of her affections and of the forms which she takes in this present
life I think that we have now said enough.

True, he replied.

And thus, I said, we have fulfilled the conditions of the argument;
we have not introduced the rewards and glories of justice, which, as you
were saying, are to be found in Homer and Hesiod; but justice in her
own nature has been shown to be best for the soul in her own nature. 
Let a man do what is just, whether he have the ring of Gyges or not,
and even if in addition to the ring of Gyges he put on the helmet
of Hades.

Very true.

And now, Glaucon, there will be no harm in further enumerating how many
and how great are the rewards which justice and the other virtues
procure to the soul from gods and men, both in life and after death.

Certainly not, he said.

Will you repay me, then, what you borrowed in the argument?

What did I borrow?

The assumption that the just man should appear unjust and the
unjust just:  for you were of opinion that even if the true state
of the case could not possibly escape the eyes of gods and men,
still this admission ought to be made for the sake of the argument,
in order that pure justice might be weighed against pure injustice. 
Do you remember?

I should be much to blame if I had forgotten.

Then, as the cause is decided, I demand on behalf of justice that
the estimation in which she is held by gods and men and which we
acknowledge to be her due should now be restored to her by us;
since she has been shown to confer reality, and not to deceive those
who truly possess her, let what has been taken from her be given back,
that so she may win that palm of appearance which is hers also,
and which she gives to her own.

The demand, he said, is just.

In the first place, I said--and this is the first thing which you
will have to give back--the nature both of the just and unjust
is truly known to the gods.

Granted.

And if they are both known to them, one must be the friend and
the other the enemy of the gods, as we admitted from the beginning?

True.

And the friend of the gods may be supposed to receive from them all
things at their best, excepting only such evil as is the necessary
consequence of former sins?

Certainly.

Then this must be our notion of the just man, that even when he is
in poverty or sickness, or any other seeming misfortune, all things
will in the end work together for good to him in life and death: 
for the gods have a care of any one whose desire is to become just
and to be like God, as far as man can attain the divine likeness,
by the pursuit of virtue?

Yes, he said; if he is like God he will surely not be neglected
by him.

And of the unjust may not the opposite be supposed?

Certainly.

Such, then, are the palms of victory which the gods give the just?

That is my conviction.

And what do they receive of men?  Look at things as they really are,
and you will see that the clever unjust are in the case of runners,
who run well from the starting-place to the goal but not back again
from the goal:  they go off at a great pace, but in the end only
look foolish, slinking away with their ears draggling on their shoulders,
and without a crown; but the true runner comes to the finish and
receives the prize and is crowned.  And this is the way with the just;
he who endures to the end of every action and occasion of his entire
life has a good report and carries off the prize which men have
to bestow.

True.

And now you must allow me to repeat of the just the blessings which
you were attributing to the fortunate unjust.  I shall say of them,
what you were saying of the others, that as they grow older,
they become rulers in their own city if they care to be; they marry
whom they like and give in marriage to whom they will; all that you
said of the others I now say of these.  And, on the other hand,
of the unjust I say that the greater number, even though they escape
in their youth, are found out at last and look foolish at the end
of their course, and when they come to be old and miserable are
flouted alike by stranger and citizen; they are beaten and then
come those things unfit for ears polite, as you truly term them;
they will be racked and have their eyes burned out, as you were saying. 
And you may suppose that I have repeated the remainder of your tale
of horrors.  But will you let me assume, without reciting them,
that these things are true?

Certainly, he said, what you say is true.

These, then, are the prizes and rewards and gifts which are bestowed
upon the just by gods and men in this present life, in addition
to the other good things which justice of herself provides.

Yes, he said; and they are fair and lasting.

And yet, I said, all these are as nothing, either in number or
greatness in comparison with those other recompenses which await
both just and unjust after death.  And you ought to hear them,
and then both just and unjust will have received from us a full
payment of the debt which the argument owes to them.

Speak, he said; there are few things which I would more gladly hear.

SOCRATES

Well, I said, I will tell you a tale; not one of the tales
which Odysseus tells to the hero Alcinous, yet this too is a tale
of a hero, Er the son of Armenius, a Pamphylian by birth. 
He was slain in battle, and ten days afterwards, when the bodies
of the dead were taken up already in a state of corruption, his body
was found unaffected by decay, and carried away home to be buried. 
And on the twelfth day, as he was lying on the funeral pile,
he returned to life and told them what he had seen in the other world. 
He said that when his soul left the body he went on a journey
with a great company, and that they came to a mysterious place at
which there were two openings in the earth; they were near together,
and over against them were two other openings in the heaven above. 
In the intermediate space there were judges seated, who commanded
the just, after they had given judgment on them and had bound
their sentences in front of them, to ascend by the heavenly way
on the right hand; and in like manner the unjust were bidden
by them to descend by the lower way on the left hand; these also
bore the symbols of their deeds, but fastened on their backs. 
He drew near, and they told him that he was to be the messenger
who would carry the report of the other world to men, and they bade
him hear and see all that was to be heard and seen in that place. 
Then he beheld and saw on one side the souls departing at either
opening of heaven and earth when sentence had been given on them;
and at the two other openings other souls, some ascending
out of the earth dusty and worn with travel, some descending
out of heaven clean and bright.  And arriving ever and anon they
seemed to have come from a long journey, and they went forth with
gladness into the meadow, where they encamped as at a festival;
and those who knew one another embraced and conversed, the souls
which came from earth curiously enquiring about the things above,
and the souls which came from heaven about the things beneath. 
And they told one another of what had happened by the way,
those from below weeping and sorrowing at the remembrance of the things
which they had endured and seen in their journey beneath the earth
(now the journey lasted a thousand years), while those from above
were describing heavenly delights and visions of inconceivable beauty. 
The Story, Glaucon, would take too long to tell; but the sum was this:--
He said that for every wrong which they had done to any one they
suffered tenfold; or once in a hundred years--such being reckoned
to be the length of man's life, and the penalty being thus paid ten
times in a thousand years.  If, for example, there were any who had been
the cause of many deaths, or had betrayed or enslaved cities or armies,
or been guilty of any other evil behaviour, for each and all of their
offences they received punishment ten times over, and the rewards
of beneficence and justice and holiness were in the same proportion. 
I need hardly repeat what he said concerning young children dying
almost as soon as they were born.  Of piety and impiety to gods
and parents, and of murderers, there were retributions other and
greater far which he described.  He mentioned that he was present
when one of the spirits asked another, `Where is Ardiaeus the Great?' 
(Now this Ardiaeus lived a thousand years before the time of Er: 
he had been the tyrant of some city of Pamphylia, and had murdered
his aged father and his elder brother, and was said to have committed
many other abominable crimes.) The answer of the other spirit was: 
`He comes not hither and will never come.  And this,' said he,
`was one of the dreadful sights which we ourselves witnessed. 
We were at the mouth of the cavern, and, having completed all
our experiences, were about to reascend, when of a sudden Ardiaeus
appeared and several others, most of whom were tyrants; and there
were also besides the tyrants private individuals who had been
great criminals:  they were just, as they fancied, about to return
into the upper world, but the mouth, instead of admitting them,
gave a roar, whenever any of these incurable sinners or some one
who had not been sufficiently punished tried to ascend; and then
wild men of fiery aspect, who were standing by and heard the sound,
seized and carried them off; and Ardiaeus and others they bound head
and foot and hand, and threw them down and flayed them with scourges,
and dragged them along the road at the side, carding them on thorns
like wool, and declaring to the passers-by what were their crimes,
and that they were being taken away to be cast into hell.' 
And of all the many terrors which they had endured, he said that there
was none like the terror which each of them felt at that moment,
lest they should hear the voice; and when there was silence,
one by one they ascended with exceeding joy.  These, said Er,
were the penalties and retributions, and there were blessings as
great.

Now when the spirits which were in the meadow had tarried seven days,
on the eighth they were obliged to proceed on their journey, and,
on the fourth day after, he said that they came to a place where
they could see from above a line of light, straight as a column,
extending right through the whole heaven and through the earth,
in colour resembling the rainbow, only brighter and purer;
another day's journey brought them to the place, and there,
in the midst of the light, they saw the ends of the chains of heaven
let down from above:  for this light is the belt of heaven,
and holds together the circle of the universe, like the under-girders
of a trireme.  From these ends is extended the spindle of Necessity,
on which all the revolutions turn.  The shaft and hook of this
spindle are made of steel, and the whorl is made partly of steel
and also partly of other materials.  Now the whorl is in form
like the whorl used on earth; and the description of it implied
that there is one large hollow whorl which is quite scooped out,
and into this is fitted another lesser one, and another, and another,
and four others, making eight in all, like vessels which fit
into one another; the whorls show their edges on the upper side,
and on their lower side all together form one continuous whorl. 
This is pierced by the spindle, which is driven home through the centre
of the eighth.  The first and outermost whorl has the rim broadest,
and the seven inner whorls are narrower, in the following proportions--
the sixth is next to the first in size, the fourth next to the sixth;
then comes the eighth; the seventh is fifth, the fifth is sixth,
the third is seventh, last and eighth comes the second. 
The largest (of fixed stars) is spangled, and the seventh (or sun)
is brightest; the eighth (or moon) coloured by the reflected
light of the seventh; the second and fifth (Saturn and Mercury)
are in colour like one another, and yellower than the preceding;
the third (Venus) has the whitest light; the fourth (Mars) is reddish;
the sixth (Jupiter) is in whiteness second.  Now the whole spindle
has the same motion; but, as the whole revolves in one direction,
the seven inner circles move slowly in the other, and of these
the swiftest is the eighth; next in swiftness are the seventh,
sixth, and fifth, which move together; third in swiftness appeared
to move according to the law of this reversed motion the fourth;
the third appeared fourth and the second fifth.  The spindle turns
on the knees of Necessity; and on the upper surface of each circle
is a siren, who goes round with them, hymning a single tone or note. 
The eight together form one harmony; and round about, at equal intervals,
there is another band, three in number, each sitting upon her throne: 
these are the Fates, daughters of Necessity, who are clothed in white
robes and have chaplets upon their heads, Lachesis and Clotho
and Atropos, who accompany with their voices the harmony of the sirens--
Lachesis singing of the past, Clotho of the present, Atropos of the future;
Clotho from time to time assisting with a touch of her right hand
the revolution of the outer circle of the whorl or spindle, and Atropos
with her left hand touching and guiding the inner ones, and Lachesis
laying hold of either in turn, first with one hand and then with the
other.

When Er and the spirits arrived, their duty was to go at once to Lachesis;
but first of all there came a prophet who arranged them in order;
then he took from the knees of Lachesis lots and samples
of lives, and having mounted a high pulpit, spoke as follows: 
`Hear the word of Lachesis, the daughter of Necessity. 
Mortal souls, behold a new cycle of life and mortality. 
Your genius will not be allotted to you, but you choose your genius;
and let him who draws the first lot have the first choice,
and the life which he chooses shall be his destiny.  Virtue is free,
and as a man honours or dishonours her he will have more or less
of her; the responsibility is with the chooser--God is justified.' 
When the Interpreter had thus spoken he scattered lots indifferently
among them all, and each of them took up the lot which fell near him,
all but Er himself (he was not allowed), and each as he took his lot
perceived the number which he had obtained.  Then the Interpreter
placed on the ground before them the samples of lives; and there were
many more lives than the souls present, and they were of all sorts. 
There were lives of every animal and of man in every condition. 
And there were tyrannies among them, some lasting out the tyrant's life,
others which broke off in the middle and came to an end in poverty
and exile and beggary; and there were lives of famous men,
some who were famous for their form and beauty as well as for
their strength and success in games, or, again, for their birth
and the qualities of their ancestors; and some who were the reverse
of famous for the opposite qualities.  And of women likewise;
there was not, however, any definite character them, because the soul,
when choosing a new life, must of necessity become different. 
But there was every other quality, and the all mingled with one another,
and also with elements of wealth and poverty, and disease and health;
and there were mean states also.  And here, my dear Glaucon,
is the supreme peril of our human state; and therefore the utmost
care should be taken.  Let each one of us leave every other kind
of knowledge and seek and follow one thing only, if peradventure
he may be able to learn and may find some one who will make him
able to learn and discern between good and evil, and so to choose
always and everywhere the better life as he has opportunity. 
He should consider the bearing of all these things which have been
mentioned severally and collectively upon virtue; he should know
what the effect of beauty is when combined with poverty or wealth
in a particular soul, and what are the good and evil consequences
of noble and humble birth, of private and public station, of strength
and weakness, of cleverness and dullness, and of all the soul,
and the operation of them when conjoined; he will then look at the nature
of the soul, and from the consideration of all these qualities he
will be able to determine which is the better and which is the worse;
and so he will choose, giving the name of evil to the life which will
make his soul more unjust, and good to the life which will make
his soul more just; all else he will disregard.  For we have seen
and know that this is the best choice both in life and after death. 
A man must take with him into the world below an adamantine faith
in truth and right, that there too he may be undazzled by the desire
of wealth or the other allurements of evil, lest, coming upon tyrannies
and similar villainies, he do irremediable wrongs to others and suffer
yet worse himself; but let him know how to choose the mean and avoid
the extremes on either side, as far as possible, not only in this
life but in all that which is to come.  For this is the way of
happiness.

And according to the report of the messenger from the other world this
was what the prophet said at the time:  `Even for the last comer,
if he chooses wisely and will live diligently, there is appointed
a happy and not undesirable existence.  Let not him who chooses first
be careless, and let not the last despair.'  And when he had spoken,
he who had the first choice came forward and in a moment chose the
greatest tyranny; his mind having been darkened by folly and sensuality,
he had not thought out the whole matter before he chose, and did
not at first sight perceive that he was fated, among other evils,
to devour his own children.  But when he had time to reflect,
and saw what was in the lot, he began to beat his breast and lament
over his choice, forgetting the proclamation of the prophet;
for, instead of throwing the blame of his misfortune on himself,
he accused chance and the gods, and everything rather than himself. 
Now he was one of those who came from heaven, and in a former life
had dwelt in a well-ordered State, but his virtue was a matter
of habit only, and he had no philosophy.  And it was true of others
who were similarly overtaken, that the greater number of them came
from heaven and therefore they had never been schooled by trial,
whereas the pilgrims who came from earth, having themselves
suffered and seen others suffer, were not in a hurry to choose. 
And owing to this inexperience of theirs, and also because the lot
was a chance, many of the souls exchanged a good destiny for an evil
or an evil for a good.  For if a man had always on his arrival
in this world dedicated himself from the first to sound philosophy,
and had been moderately fortunate in the number of the lot,
he might, as the messenger reported, be happy here, and also his
journey to another life and return to this, instead of being rough
and underground, would be smooth and heavenly.  Most curious,
he said, was the spectacle--sad and laughable and strange;
for the choice of the souls was in most cases based on their experience
of a previous life.  There he saw the soul which had once been Orpheus
choosing the life of a swan out of enmity to the race of women,
hating to be born of a woman because they had been his murderers;
he beheld also the soul of Thamyras choosing the life of a nightingale;
birds, on the other hand, like the swan and other musicians,
wanting to be men.  The soul which obtained the twentieth lot chose
the life of a lion, and this was the soul of Ajax the son of Telamon,
who would not be a man, remembering the injustice which was
done him the judgment about the arms.  The next was Agamemnon,
who took the life of an eagle, because, like Ajax, he hated
human nature by reason of his sufferings.  About the middle came
the lot of Atalanta; she, seeing the great fame of an athlete,
was unable to resist the temptation:  and after her there followed
the soul of Epeus the son of Panopeus passing into the nature of a
woman cunning in the arts; and far away among the last who chose,
the soul of the jester Thersites was putting on the form of a monkey. 
There came also the soul of Odysseus having yet to make a choice,
and his lot happened to be the last of them all.  Now the recollection
of former tolls had disenchanted him of ambition, and he went
about for a considerable time in search of the life of a private
man who had no cares; he had some difficulty in finding this,
which was lying about and had been neglected by everybody else;
and when he saw it, he said that he would have done the had
his lot been first instead of last, and that he was delighted
to have it.  And not only did men pass into animals, but I
must also mention that there were animals tame and wild who
changed into one another and into corresponding human natures--
the good into the gentle and the evil into the savage, in all sorts
of combinations.

All the souls had now chosen their lives, and they went in the order
of their choice to Lachesis, who sent with them the genius whom
they had severally chosen, to be the guardian of their lives
and the fulfiller of the choice:  this genius led the souls first
to Clotho, and drew them within the revolution of the spindle
impelled by her hand, thus ratifying the destiny of each;
and then, when they were fastened to this, carried them to Atropos,
who spun the threads and made them irreversible, whence without
turning round they passed beneath the throne of Necessity;
and when they had all passed, they marched on in a scorching heat
to the plain of Forgetfulness, which was a barren waste destitute
of trees and verdure; and then towards evening they encamped
by the river of Unmindfulness, whose water no vessel can hold;
of this they were all obliged to drink a certain quantity,
and those who were not saved by wisdom drank more than was necessary;
and each one as he drank forgot all things.  Now after they had gone
to rest, about the middle of the night there was a thunderstorm
and earthquake, and then in an instant they were driven upwards
in all manner of ways to their birth, like stars shooting. 
He himself was hindered from drinking the water.  But in what
manner or by what means he returned to the body he could not say;
only, in the morning, awaking suddenly, he found himself lying on
the pyre.

And thus, Glaucon, the tale has been saved and has not perished,
and will save us if we are obedient to the word spoken; and we
shall pass safely over the river of Forgetfulness and our soul
will not be defiled.  Wherefore my counsel is that we hold fast ever
to the heavenly way and follow after justice and virtue always,
considering that the soul is immortal and able to endure every sort
of good and every sort of evil.  Thus shall we live dear to one another
and to the gods, both while remaining here and when, like conquerors
in the games who go round to gather gifts, we receive our reward. 
And it shall be well with us both in this life and in the pilgrimage
of a thousand years which we have been describing.

End of the Project Gutenberg Edition of The Republic, by Plato***

                                     380 BC

                                    GORGIAS

                                    by Plato

                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
GORGIAS

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: CALLICLES; SOCRATES; CHAEREPHON; GORGIAS;
POLUS

  Scene: The house of Callicles.

  Callicles. The wise man, as the proverb says, is late for a fray,
but not for a feast.

  Socrates. And are we late for a feast?

  Cal. Yes, and a delightful feast; for Gorgias has just been
exhibiting to us many fine things.

  Soc. It is not my fault, Callicles; our friend Chaerephon is to
blame; for he would keep us loitering in the Agora.

  Chaerephon. Never mind, Socrates; the misfortune of which I have
been the cause I will also repair; for Gorgias is a friend of mine,
and I will make him give the exhibition again either now, or, if you
prefer, at some other time.

  Cal. What is the matter, Chaerephon-does Socrates want to hear
Gorgias?

  Chaer. Yes, that was our intention in coming.

  Cal. Come into my house, then; for Gorgias is staying with me, and
he shall exhibit to you.

  Soc. Very good, Callicles; but will he answer our questions? for I
want to hear from him what is the nature of his art, and what it is
which he professes and teaches; he may, as you [Chaerephon] suggest,
defer the exhibition to some other time.

  Cal. There is nothing like asking him, Socrates; and indeed to
answer questions is a part of his exhibition, for he was saying only
just now, that any one in my house might put any question to him,
and that he would answer.

  Soc. How fortunate! will you ask him, Chaerephon-?

  Chaer. What shall I ask him?

  Soc. Ask him who he is.

  Chaer. What do you mean?

  Soc. I mean such a question as would elicit from him, if he had been
a maker of shoes, the answer that he is a cobbler. Do you understand?

  Chaer. I understand, and will ask him: Tell me, Gorgias, is our
friend Callicles right in saying that you undertake to answer any
questions which you are asked?

  Gorgias. Quite right, Chaerephon: I was saying as much only just
now; and I may add, that many years have elapsed since any one has
asked me a new one.

  Chaer. Then you must be very ready, Gorgias.

  Gor. Of that, Chaerephon, you can make trial.

  Polus. Yes, indeed, and if you like, Chaerephon, you may make
trial of me too, for I think that Gorgias, who has been talking a long
time, is tired.

  Chaer. And do you, Polus, think that you can answer better than
Gorgias?

  Pol. What does that matter if I answer well enough for you?

  Chaer. Not at all:-and you shall answer if you like.

  Pol. Ask:-

  Chaer. My question is this: If Gorgias had the skill of his
brother Herodicus, what ought we to call him? Ought he not to have the
name which is given to his brother?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Chaer. Then we should be right in calling him a physician?

  Pol. Yes.

  Chaer. And if he had the skill of Aristophon the son of Aglaophon,
or of his brother Polygnotus, what ought we to call him?

  Pol. Clearly, a painter.

  Chaer. But now what shall we call him-what is the art in which he is
skilled.

  Pol. O Chaerephon, there are many arts among mankind which are
experimental, and have their origin in experience, for experience
makes the days of men to proceed according to art, and inexperience
according to chance, and different persons in different ways are
proficient in different arts, and the best persons in the best arts.
And our friend Gorgias is one of the best, and the art in which he
is a proficient is the noblest.

  Soc. Polus has been taught how to make a capital speech, Gorgias;
but he is not fulfilling the promise which he made to Chaerephon.

  Gor. What do you mean, Socrates?

  Soc. I mean that he has not exactly answered the question which he
was asked.

  Gor. Then why not ask him yourself?

  Soc. But I would much rather ask you, if you are disposed to answer:
for I see, from the few words which Polus has uttered, that he has
attended more to the art which is called rhetoric than to dialectic.

  Pol. What makes you say so, Socrates?

  Soc. Because, Polus, when Chaerephon asked you what was the art
which Gorgias knows, you praised it as if you were answering some
one who found fault with it, but you never said what the art was.

  Pol. Why, did I not say that it was the noblest of arts?

  Soc. Yes, indeed, but that was no answer to the question: nobody
asked what was the quality, but what was the nature, of the art, and
by what name we were to describe Gorgias. And I would still beg you
briefly and clearly, as you answered Chaerephon when he asked you at
first, to say what this art is, and what we ought to call Gorgias:
Or rather, Gorgias, let me turn to you, and ask the same question what
are we to call you, and what is the art which you profess?

  Gor. Rhetoric, Socrates, is my art.

  Soc. Then I am to call you a rhetorician?

  Gor. Yes, Socrates, and a good one too, if you would call me that
which, in Homeric language, "I boast myself to be."

  Soc. I should wish to do so.

  Gor. Then pray do.

  Soc. And are we to say that you are able to make other men
rhetoricians?

  Gor. Yes, that is exactly what I profess to make them, not only at
Athens, but in all places.

  Soc. And will you continue to ask and answer questions, Gorgias,
as we are at present doing and reserve for another occasion the longer
mode of speech which Polus was attempting? Will you keep your promise,
and answer shortly the questions which are asked of you?

  Gor. Some answers, Socrates, are of necessity longer; but I will
do my best to make them as short as possible; for a part of my
profession is that I can be as short as any one.

  Soc. That is what is wanted, Gorgias; exhibit the shorter method
now, and the longer one at some other time.

  Gor. Well, I will; and you will certainly say, that you never
heard a man use fewer words.

  Soc. Very good then; as you profess to be a rhetorician, and a maker
of rhetoricians, let me ask you, with what is rhetoric concerned: I
might ask with what is weaving concerned, and you would reply (would
you not?), with the making of garments?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And music is concerned with the composition of melodies?

  Gor. It is.

  Soc. By Here, Gorgias, I admire the surpassing brevity of your
answers.

  Gor. Yes, Socrates, I do think myself good at that.

  Soc. I am glad to hear it; answer me in like manner about
rhetoric: with what is rhetoric concerned?

  Gor. With discourse.

  Soc. What sort of discourse, Gorgias?-such discourse as would
teach the sick under what treatment they might get well?

  Gor. No.

  Soc. Then rhetoric does not treat of all kinds of discourse?

  Gor. Certainly not.

  Soc. And yet rhetoric makes men able to speak?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And to understand that about which they speak?

  Gor. Of course.

  Soc. But does not the art of medicine, which we were just now
mentioning, also make men able to understand and speak about the sick?

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. Then medicine also treats of discourse?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. Of discourse concerning diseases?

  Gor. Just so.

  Soc. And does not gymnastic also treat of discourse concerning the
good or evil condition of the body?

  Gor. Very true.

  Soc. And the same, Gorgias, is true of the other arts:-all of them
treat of discourse concerning the subjects with which they severally
have to do.

  Gor. Clearly.

  Soc. Then why, if you call rhetoric the art which treats of
discourse, and all the other arts treat of discourse, do you not
call them arts of rhetoric?

  Gor. Because, Socrates, the knowledge of the other arts has only
to do with some sort of external action, as of the hand; but there
is no such action of the hand in rhetoric which works and takes effect
only through the medium of discourse. And therefore I am justified
in saying that rhetoric treats of discourse.

  Soc. I am not sure whether I entirely understand you, but I dare say
I shall soon know better; please to answer me a question:-you would
allow that there are arts?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. As to the arts generally, they are for the most part
concerned with doing, and require little or no speaking; in
painting, and statuary, and many other arts, the work may proceed in
silence; and of such arts I suppose you would say that they do not
come within the province of rhetoric.

  Gor. You perfectly conceive my meaning, Socrates.

  Soc. But there are other arts which work wholly through the medium
of language, and require either no action or very little, as, for
example, the arts of arithmetic, of calculation, of geometry, and of
playing draughts; in some of these speech is pretty nearly
co-extensive with action, but in most of them the verbal element is
greater-they depend wholly on words for their efficacy and power:
and I take your meaning to be that rhetoric is an art of this latter
sort?

  Gor. Exactly.

  Soc. And yet I do not believe that you really mean to call any of
these arts rhetoric; although the precise expression which you used
was, that rhetoric is an art which works and takes effect only through
the medium of discourse; and an adversary who wished to be captious
might say, "And so, Gorgias, you call arithmetic rhetoric." But I do
not think that you really call arithmetic rhetoric any more than
geometry would be so called by you.

  Gor. You are quite right, Socrates, in your apprehension of my
meaning.

  Soc. Well, then, let me now have the rest of my answer:-seeing
that rhetoric is one of those arts which works mainly by the use of
words, and there are other arts which also use words, tell me what
is that quality in words with which rhetoric is concerned:-Suppose
that a person asks me about some of the arts which I was mentioning
just now; he might say, "Socrates, what is arithmetic?" and I should
reply to him, as you replied to me, that arithmetic is one of those
arts which take effect through words. And then he would proceed to
ask: "Words about what?" and I should reply, Words about and even
numbers, and how many there are of each. And if he asked again:
"What is the art of calculation?" I should say, That also is one of
the arts which is concerned wholly with words. And if he further said,
"Concerned with what?" I should say, like the clerks in the
assembly, "as aforesaid" of arithmetic, but with a difference, the
difference being that the art of calculation considers not only the
quantities of odd and even numbers, but also their numerical relations
to themselves and to one another. And suppose, again, I were to say
that astronomy is only word-he would ask, "Words about what,
Socrates?" and I should answer, that astronomy tells us about the
motions of the stars and sun and moon, and their relative swiftness.

  Gor. You would be quite right, Socrates.

  Soc. And now let us have from you, Gorgias, the truth about
rhetoric: which you would admit (would you not?) to be one of those
arts which act always and fulfil all their ends through the medium
of words?

  Gor. True.

  Soc. Words which do what? I should ask. To what class of things do
the words which rhetoric uses relate?

  Gor. To the greatest, Socrates, and the best of human things.

  Soc. That again, Gorgias is ambiguous; I am still in the dark: for
which are the greatest and best of human things? I dare say that you
have heard men singing at feasts the old drinking song, in which the
singers enumerate the goods of life, first health, beauty next,
thirdly, as the writer of the song says, wealth honesty obtained.

  Gor. Yes, I know the song; but what is your drift?

  Soc. I mean to say, that the producers of those things which the
author of the song praises, that is to say, the physician, the
trainer, the money-maker, will at once come to you, and first the
physician will say: "O Socrates, Gorgias is deceiving you, for my
art is concerned with the greatest good of men and not his." And
when I ask, Who are you? he will reply, "I am a physician." What do
you mean? I shall say. Do you mean that your art produces the greatest
good? "Certainly," he will answer, "for is not health the greatest
good? What greater good can men have, Socrates?" And after him the
trainer will come and say, "I too, Socrates, shall be greatly
surprised if Gorgias can show more good of his art than I can show
of mine." To him again I shall say, Who are you, honest friend, and
what is your business? "I am a trainer," he will reply, "and my
business is to make men beautiful and strong in body." When I have
done with the trainer, there arrives the money-maker, and he, as I
expect, utterly despise them all. "Consider Socrates," he will say,
"whether Gorgias or any one-else can produce any greater good than
wealth." Well, you and I say to him, and are you a creator of
wealth? "Yes," he replies. And who are you? "A money-maker." And do
you consider wealth to be the greatest good of man? "Of course,"
will be his reply. And we shall rejoin: Yes; but our friend Gorgias
contends that his art produces a greater good than yours. And then
he will be sure to go on and ask, "What good? Let Gorgias answer." Now
I want you, Gorgias, to imagine that this question is asked of you
by them and by me; What is that which, as you say, is the greatest
good of man, and of which you are the creator? Answer us.

  Gor. That good, Socrates, which is truly the greatest, being that
which gives to men freedom in their own persons, and to individuals
the power of ruling over others in their several states.

  Soc. And what would you consider this to be?

  Gor. What is there greater than the word which persuades the
judges in the courts, or the senators in the council, or the
citizens in the assembly, or at any other political meeting?-if you
have the power of uttering this word, you will have the physician your
slave, and the trainer your slave, and the money-maker of whom you
talk will be found to gather treasures, not for himself, but for you
who are able to speak and to persuade the multitude.

  Soc. Now I think, Gorgias, that you have very accurately explained
what you conceive to be the art of rhetoric; and you mean to say, if I
am not mistaken, that rhetoric is the artificer of persuasion,
having this and no other business, and that this is her crown and end.
Do you know any other effect of rhetoric over and above that of
producing persuasion?

  Gor. No: the definition seems to me very fair, Socrates; for
persuasion is the chief end of rhetoric.

  Soc. Then hear me, Gorgias, for I am quite sure that if there ever
was a man who-entered on the discussion of a matter from a pure love
of knowing the truth, I am such a one, and I should say the same of
you.

  Gor. What is coming, Socrates?

  Soc. I will tell you: I am very well aware that do not know what,
according to you, is the exact nature, or what are the topics of
that persuasion of which you speak, and which is given by rhetoric;
although I have a suspicion about both the one and the other. And I am
going to ask-what is this power of persuasion which is given by
rhetoric, and about what? But why, if I have a suspicion, do I ask
instead of telling you? Not for your sake, but in order that the
argument may proceed in such a manner as is most likely to set forth
the truth. And I would have you observe, that I am right in asking
this further question: If I asked, "What sort of a painter is Zeuxis?"
and you said, "The painter of figures," should I not be right in
asking, What kind of figures, and where do you find them?"

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. And the reason for asking this second question would be, that
there are other painters besides, who paint many other figures?

  Gor. True.

  Soc. But if there had been no one but Zeuxis who painted them,
then you would have answered very well?

  Gor. Quite so.

  Soc. Now I was it to know about rhetoric in the same way;-is
rhetoric the only art which brings persuasion, or do other arts have
the same effect? I mean to say-Does he who teaches anything persuade
men of that which he teaches or not?

  Gor. He persuades, Socrates,-there can be no mistake about that.

  Soc. Again, if we take the arts of which we were just now
speaking:-do not arithmetic and the arithmeticians teach us the
properties of number?

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. And therefore persuade us of them?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. Then arithmetic as well as rhetoric is an artificer of
persuasion?

  Gor. Clearly.

  Soc. And if any one asks us what sort of persuasion, and about
what,-we shall answer, persuasion which teaches the quantity of odd
and even; and we shall be able to show that all the other arts of
which we were just now speaking are artificers of persuasion, and of
what sort, and about what.

  Gor. Very true.

  Soc. Then rhetoric is not the only artificer of persuasion?

  Gor. True.

  Soc. Seeing, then, that not only rhetoric works by persuasion, but
that other arts do the same, as in the case of the painter, a question
has arisen which is a very fair one: Of what persuasion is rhetoric
the artificer, and about what?-is not that a fair way of putting the
question?

  Gor. I think so.

  Soc. Then, if you approve the question, Gorgias, what is the answer?

  Gor. I answer, Socrates, that rhetoric is the art of persuasion in
courts of law and other assemblies, as I was just now saying, and
about the just and unjust.

  Soc. And that, Gorgias, was what I was suspecting to be your notion;
yet I would not have you wonder if by-and-by I am found repeating a
seemingly plain question; for I ask not in order to confute you, but
as I was saying that the argument may proceed consecutively, and
that we may not get the habit of anticipating and suspecting the
meaning of one another's words; I would have you develop your own
views in your own way, whatever may be your hypothesis.

  Gor. I think that you are quite right, Socrates.

  Soc. Then let me raise another question; there is such a thing as
"having learned"?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And there is also "having believed"?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And is the "having learned" the same "having believed," and are
learning and belief the same things?

  Gor. In my judgment, Socrates, they are not the same.

  Soc. And your judgment is right, as you may ascertain in this
way:-If a person were to say to you, "Is there, Gorgias, a false
belief as well as a true?" -you would reply, if I am not mistaken,
that there is.

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. Well, but is there a false knowledge as well as a true?

  Gor. No.

  Soc. No, indeed; and this again proves that knowledge and belief
differ.

  Gor. Very true.

  Soc. And yet those who have learned as well as those who have
believed are persuaded?

  Gor. Just so.

  Soc. Shall we then assume two sorts of persuasion,-one which is
the source of belief without knowledge, as the other is of knowledge?

  Gor. By all means.

  Soc. And which sort of persuasion does rhetoric create in courts
of law and other assemblies about the just and unjust, the sort of
persuasion which gives belief without knowledge, or that which gives
knowledge?

  Gor. Clearly, Socrates, that which only gives belief.

  Soc. Then rhetoric, as would appear, is the artificer of a
persuasion which creates belief about the just and unjust, but gives
no instruction about them?

  Gor. True.

  Soc. And the rhetorician does not instruct the courts of law or
other assemblies about things just and unjust, but he creates belief
about them; for no one can be supposed to instruct such a vast
multitude about such high matters in a short time?

  Gor. Certainly not.

  Soc. Come, then, and let us see what we really mean about
rhetoric; for I do not know what my own meaning is as yet. When the
assembly meets to elect a physician or a shipwright or any other
craftsman, will the rhetorician be taken into counsel? Surely not. For
at every election he ought to be chosen who is most skilled; and,
again, when walls have to be built or harbours or docks to be
constructed, not the rhetorician but the master workman will advise;
or when generals have to be chosen and an order of battle arranged, or
a proposition taken, then the military will advise and not the
rhetoricians: what do you say, Gorgias? Since you profess to be a
rhetorician and a maker of rhetoricians, I cannot do better than learn
the nature of your art from you. And here let me assure you that I
have your interest in view as well as my own. For likely enough some
one or other of the young men present might desire to become your
pupil, and in fact I see some, and a good many too, who have this
wish, but they would be too modest to question you. And therefore when
you are interrogated by me, I would have you imagine that you are
interrogated by them. "What is the use of coming to you, Gorgias? they
will say about what will you teach us to advise the state?-about the
just and unjust only, or about those other things also which
Socrates has just mentioned? How will you answer them?

  Gor. I like your way of leading us on, Socrates, and I will
endeavour to reveal to you the whole nature of rhetoric. You must have
heard, I think, that the docks and the walls of the Athenians and
the plan of the harbour were devised in accordance with the
counsels, partly of Themistocles, and partly of Pericles, and not at
the suggestion of the builders.

  Soc. Such is the tradition, Gorgias, about Themistocles; and I
myself heard the speech of Pericles when he advised us about the
middle wall.

  Gor. And you will observe, Socrates, that when a decision has to
be given in such matters the rhetoricians are the advisers; they are
the men who win their point.

  Soc. I had that in my admiring mind, Gorgias, when I asked what is
the nature of rhetoric, which always appears to me, when I look at the
matter in this way, to be a marvel of greatness.

  Gor. A marvel, indeed, Socrates, if you only knew how rhetoric
comprehends and holds under her sway all the inferior arts. Let me
offer you a striking example of this. On several occasions I have been
with my brother Herodicus or some other physician to see one of his
patients, who would not allow the physician to give him medicine, or
apply a knife or hot iron to him; and I have persuaded him to do for
me what he would not do for the physician just by the use of rhetoric.
And I say that if a rhetorician and a physician were to go to any
city, and had there to argue in the Ecclesia or any other assembly
as to which of them should be elected state-physician, the physician
would have no chance; but he who could speak would be chosen if he
wished; and in a contest with a man of any other profession the
rhetorician more than any one would have the power of getting
himself chosen, for he can speak more persuasively to the multitude
than any of them, and on any subject. Such is the nature and power
of the art of rhetoric And yet, Socrates, rhetoric should be used like
any other competitive art, not against everybody-the rhetorician ought
not to abuse his strength any more than a pugilist or pancratiast or
other master of fence; because he has powers which are more than a
match either for friend or enemy, he ought not therefore to strike,
stab, or slay his friends. Suppose a man to have been trained in the
palestra and to be a skilful boxer-he in the fulness of his strength
goes and strikes his father or mother or one of his familiars or
friends; but that is no reason why the trainers or fencing-masters
should be held in detestation or banished from the city-surely not.
For they taught their art for a good purpose, to be used against
enemies and evil-doers, in self-defence not in aggression, and
others have perverted their instructions, and turned to a bad use
their own strength and skill. But not on this account are the teachers
bad, neither is the art in fault, or bad in itself; I should rather
say that those who make a bad use of the art are to blame. And the
same argument holds good of rhetoric; for the rhetorician can speak
against all men and upon any subject-in short, he can persuade the
multitude better than any other man of anything which he pleases,
but he should not therefore seek to defraud the physician or any other
artist of his reputation merely because he has the power; he ought
to use rhetoric fairly, as he would also use his athletic powers.
And if after having become a rhetorician he makes a bad use of his
strength and skill, his instructor surely ought not on that account to
be held in detestation or banished. For he was intended by his teacher
to make a good use of his instructions, but he abuses them. And
therefore he is the person who ought to be held in detestation,
banished, and put to death, and not his instructor.

  Soc. You, Gorgias, like myself, have had great experience of
disputations, and you must have observed, I think, that they do not
always terminate in mutual edification, or in the definition by either
party of the subjects which they are discussing; but disagreements are
apt to arise-somebody says that another has not spoken truly or
clearly; and then they get into a passion and begin to quarrel, both
parties conceiving that their opponents are arguing from personal
feeling only and jealousy of themselves, not from any interest in
the question at issue. And sometimes they will go on abusing one
another until the company at last are quite vexed at themselves for
ever listening to such fellows. Why do I say this? Why, because I
cannot help feeling that you are now saying what is not quite
consistent or accordant with what you were saying at first about
rhetoric. And I am afraid to point this out to you, lest you should
think that I have some animosity against you, and that I speak, not
for the sake of discovering the truth, but from jealousy of you. Now
if you are one of my sort, I should like to cross-examine you, but
if not I will let you alone. And what is my sort? you will ask. I am
one of those who are very willing to be refuted if I say anything
which is not true, and very willing to refute any one else who says
what is not true, and quite as ready to be refuted as to refute-I
for I hold that this is the greater gain of the two, just as the
gain is greater of being cured of a very great evil than of curing
another. For I imagine that there is no evil which a man can endure so
great as an erroneous opinion about the matters of which we are
speaking and if you claim to be one of my sort, let us have the
discussion out, but if you would rather have done, no matter-let us
make an end of it.

  Gor. I should say, Socrates, that I am quite the man whom you
indicate; but, perhaps, we ought to consider the audience, for, before
you came, I had already given a long exhibition, and if we proceed the
argument may run on to a great length. And therefore I think that we
should consider whether we, may not be detaining some part of the
company when they are wanting to do something else.

  Chaer. You hear the audience cheering, Gorgias and Socrates, which
shows their desire to listen to you; and for myself, Heaven forbid
that I should have any business on hand which would take me Away
from a discussion so interesting and so ably maintained.

  Cal. By the gods, Chaerephon, although I have been present at many
discussions, I doubt whether I was ever so much delighted before,
and therefore if you go on discoursing all day I shall be the better
pleased.

  Soc. I may truly say, Callicles, that I am willing, if Gorgias is.

  Gor. After all this, Socrates, I should be disgraced if I refused,
especially as I have promised to answer all comers; in accordance with
the wishes of the company, them, do you begin. and ask of me any
question which you like.

  Soc. Let me tell you then, Gorgias, what surprises me in your words;
though I dare say that you may be right, and I may have understood
your meaning. You say that you can make any man, who will learn of
you, a rhetorician?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. Do you mean that you will teach him to gain the ears of the
multitude on any subject, and this not by instruction but by
persuasion?

  Gor. Quite so.

  Soc. You were saying, in fact, that the rhetorician will have,
greater powers of persuasion than the physician even in a matter of
health?

  Gor. Yes, with the multitude-that is.

  Soc. You mean to say, with the ignorant; for with those who know
he cannot be supposed to have greater powers of persuasion.

  Gor. Very true.

  Soc. But if he is to have more power of persuasion than the
physician, he will have greater power than he who knows?

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. Although he is not a physician:-is he?

  Gor. No.

  Soc. And he who is not a physician must, obviously, be ignorant of
what the physician knows.

  Gor. Clearly.

  Soc. Then, when the rhetorician is more persuasive than the
physician, the ignorant is more persuasive with the ignorant than he
who has knowledge?-is not that the inference?

  Gor. In the case supposed:-Yes.

  Soc. And the same holds of the relation of rhetoric to all the other
arts; the rhetorician need not know the truth about things; he has
only to discover some way of persuading the ignorant that he has
more knowledge than those who know?

  Gor. Yes, Socrates, and is not this a great comfort?-not to have
learned the other arts, but the art of rhetoric only, and yet to be in
no way inferior to the professors of them?

  Soc. Whether the rhetorician is or not inferior on this account is a
question which we will hereafter examine if the enquiry is likely to
be of any service to us; but I would rather begin by asking, whether
he is as ignorant of the just and unjust, base and honourable, good
and evil, as he is of medicine and the other arts; I mean to say, does
he really know anything of what is good and evil, base or
honourable, just or unjust in them; or has he only a way with the
ignorant of persuading them that he not knowing is to be esteemed to
know more about these things than some. one else who knows? Or must
the pupil know these things and come to you knowing them before he can
acquire the art of rhetoric? If he is ignorant, you who are the
teacher of rhetoric will not teach him-it is not your business; but
you will make him seem to the multitude to know them, when he does not
know them; and seem to be a good man, when he is not. Or will you be
unable to teach him rhetoric at all, unless he knows the truth of
these things first? What is to be said about all this? By heavens,
Gorgias, I wish that you would reveal to me the power of rhetoric,
as you were saying that you would.

  Gor. Well, Socrates, I suppose that if the pupil does chance not
to know them, he will have to learn of me these things as well.

  Soc. Say no more, for there you are right; and so he whom you make a
rhetorician must either know the nature of the just and unjust
already, or he must be taught by you.

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. Well, and is not he who has learned carpentering a carpenter?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And he who has learned music a musician?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And he who has learned medicine is a physician, in like manner?
He who has learned anything whatever is that which his knowledge makes
him.

  Gor. Certainly.

  Soc. And in the same way, he who has learned what is just is just?

  Gor. To be sure.

  Soc. And he who is just may be supposed to do what is just?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And must not the just man always desire to do what is just?

  Gor. That is clearly the inference.

  Soc. Surely, then, the just man will never consent to do injustice?

  Gor. Certainly not.

  Soc. And according to the argument the rhetorician must be a just
man?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. And will therefore never be willing to do injustice?

  Gor. Clearly not.

  Soc. But do you remember saying just now that the trainer is not
to be accused or banished if the pugilist makes a wrong use of his
pugilistic art; and in like manner, if the rhetorician makes a bad and
unjust use of rhetoric, that is not to be laid to the charge of his
teacher, who is not to be banished, but the wrong-doer himself who
made a bad use of his rhetoric-he is to be banished-was not that said?

  Gor. Yes, it was.

  Soc. But now we are affirming that the aforesaid rhetorician will
never have done injustice at all?

  Gor. True.

  Soc. And at the very outset, Gorgias, it was said that rhetoric
treated of discourse, not [like arithmetic] about odd and even, but
about just and unjust? Was not this said?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. I was thinking at the time, when I heard you saying so, that
rhetoric, which is always discoursing about justice, could not
possibly be an unjust thing. But when you added, shortly afterwards,
that the rhetorician might make a bad use of rhetoric I noted with
surprise the inconsistency into which you had fallen; and I said, that
if you thought, as I did, that there was a gain in being refuted,
there would be an advantage in going on with the question, but if not,
I would leave off. And in the course of our investigations, as you
will see yourself, the rhetorician has been acknowledged to be
incapable of making an unjust use of rhetoric, or of willingness to do
injustice. By the dog, Gorgias, there will be a great deal of
discussion, before we get at the truth of all this.

  Polus. And do even you, Socrates, seriously believe what you are now
saying about rhetoric? What! because Gorgias was ashamed to deny
that the rhetorician knew the just and the honourable and the good,
and admitted that to any one who came to him ignorant of them he could
teach them, and then out of this admission there arose a
contradiction-the thing which you dearly love, and to which not he,
but you, brought the argument by your captious questions-[do you
seriously believe that there is any truth in all this?] For will any
one ever acknowledge that he does not know, or cannot teach, the
nature of justice? The truth is, that there is great want of manners
in bringing the argument to such a pass.

  Soc. Illustrious Polus, the reason why we provide ourselves with
friends and children is, that when we get old and stumble, a younger
generation may be at hand to set us on our legs again in our words and
in our actions: and now, if I and Gorgias are stumbling, here are
you who should raise us up; and I for my part engage to retract any
error into which you may think that I have fallen-upon one condition:

  Pol. What condition?

  Soc. That you contract, Polus, the prolixity of speech in which
you indulged at first.

  Pol. What! do you mean that I may not use as many words as I please?

  Soc. Only to think, my friend, that having come on a visit to
Athens, which is the most free-spoken state in Hellas, you when you
got there, and you alone, should be deprived of the power of
speech-that would be hard indeed. But then consider my case:-shall not
I be very hardly used, if, when you are making a long oration, and
refusing to answer what you are asked, I am compelled to stay and
listen to you, and may not go away? I say rather, if you have a real
interest in the argument, or, to repeat my former expression, have any
desire to set it on its legs, take back any statement which you
please; and in your turn ask and answer, like myself and
Gorgias-refute and be refuted: for I suppose that you would claim to
know what Gorgias knows-would you not?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And you, like him, invite any one to ask you about anything
which he pleases, and you will know how to answer him?

  Pol. To be sure.

  Soc. And now, which will you do, ask or answer?

  Pol. I will ask; and do you answer me, Socrates, the same question
which Gorgias, as you suppose, is unable to answer: What is rhetoric?

  Soc. Do you mean what sort of an art?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. To say the truth, Polus, it is not an art at all, in my
opinion.

  Pol. Then what, in your opinion, is rhetoric?

  Soc. A thing which, as I was lately reading in a book of yours,
you say that you have made an art.

  Pol. What thing?

  Soc. I should say a sort of experience.

  Pol. Does rhetoric seem to you to be an experience?

  Soc. That is my view, but you may be of another mind.

  Pol. An experience in what?

  Soc. An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification.

  Pol. And if able to gratify others, must not rhetoric be a fine
thing?

  Soc. What are you saying, Polus? Why do you ask me whether
rhetoric is a fine thing or not, when I have not as yet told you
what rhetoric is?

  Pol. Did I not hear you say that rhetoric was a sort of experience?

  Soc. Will you, who are so desirous to gratify others, afford a
slight gratification to me?

  Pol. I will.

  Soc. Will you ask me, what sort of an art is cookery?

  Pol. What sort of an art is cookery?

  Soc. Not an art at all, Polus.

  Pol. What then?

  Soc. I should say an experience.

  Pol. In what? I wish that you would explain to me.

  Soc. An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification,
Polus.

  Pol. Then are cookery and rhetoric the same?

  Soc. No, they are only different parts of the same profession.

  Pol. Of what profession?

  Soc. I am afraid that the truth may seem discourteous; and I
hesitate to answer, lest Gorgias should imagine that I am making fun
of his own profession. For whether or no this is that art of
rhetoric which Gorgias practises I really cannot tell:-from what he
was just now saying, nothing appeared of what he thought of his art,
but the rhetoric which I mean is a part of a not very creditable
whole.

  Gor. A part of what, Socrates? Say what you mean, and never mind me.

  Soc. In my opinion then, Gorgias, the whole of which rhetoric is a
part is not an art at all, but the habit of a bold and ready wit,
which knows how to manage mankind: this habit I sum up under the
word "flattery"; and it appears to me to have many other parts, one of
which is cookery, which may seem to be an art, but, as I maintain,
is only an experience or routine and not an art:-another part is
rhetoric, and the art of attiring and sophistry are two others: thus
there are four branches, and four different things answering to
them. And Polus may ask, if he likes, for he has not as yet been
informed, what part of flattery is rhetoric: he did not see that I had
not yet answered him when he proceeded to ask a further question:
Whether I do not think rhetoric a fine thing? But I shall not tell him
whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, until I have first
answered, "What is rhetoric?" For that would not be right, Polus;
but I shall be happy to answer, if you will ask me, What part of
flattery is rhetoric?

  Pol. I will ask and do you answer? What part of flattery is
rhetoric?

  Soc. Will you understand my answer? Rhetoric, according to my
view, is the ghost or counterfeit of a part of politics.

  Pol. And noble or ignoble?

  Soc. Ignoble, I should say, if I am compelled to answer, for I
call what is bad ignoble: though I doubt whether you understand what I
was saying before.

  Gor. Indeed, Socrates, I cannot say that I understand myself.

  Soc. I do not wonder, Gorgias; for I have not as yet explained
myself, and our friend Polus, colt by name and colt by nature, is
apt to run away.

  Gor. Never mind him, but explain to me what you mean by saying
that rhetoric is the counterfeit of a part of politics.

  Soc. I will try, then, to explain my notion of rhetoric, and if I am
mistaken, my friend Polus shall refute me. We may assume the existence
of bodies and of souls?

  Gor. Of course.

  Soc. You would further admit that there is a good condition of
either of them?

  Gor. Yes.

  Soc. Which condition may not be really good, but good only in
appearance? I mean to say, that there are many persons who appear to
be in good health, and whom only a physician or trainer will discern
at first sight not to be in good health.

  Gor. True.

  Soc. And this applies not only to the body, but also to the soul: in
either there may be that which gives the appearance of health and
not the reality?

  Gor. Yes, certainly.

  Soc. And now I will endeavour to explain to you more clearly what
I mean: The soul and body being two, have two arts corresponding to
them: there is the art of politics attending on the soul; and
another art attending on the body, of which I know no single name, but
which may be described as having two divisions, one of them gymnastic,
and the other medicine. And in politics there is a legislative part,
which answers to gymnastic, as justice does to medicine; and the two
parts run into one another, justice having to do with the same subject
as legislation, and medicine with the same subject as gymnastic, but
with a difference. Now, seeing that there are these four arts, two
attending on the body and two on the soul for their highest good;
flattery knowing, or rather guessing their natures, has distributed
herself into four shams or simulations of them; she puts on the
likeness of some one or other of them, and pretends to be that which
she simulates, and having no regard for men's highest interests, is
ever making pleasure the bait of the unwary, and deceiving them into
the belief that she is of the highest value to them. Cookery simulates
the disguise of medicine, and pretends to know what food is the best
for the body; and if the physician and the cook had to enter into a
competition in which children were the judges, or men who had no
more sense than children, as to which of them best understands the
goodness or badness of food, the physician would be starved to
death. A flattery I deem this to be and of an ignoble sort, Polus, for
to you I am now addressing myself, because it aims at pleasure without
any thought of the best. An art I do not call it, but only an
experience, because it is unable to explain or to give a reason of the
nature of its own applications. And I do not call any irrational thing
an art; but if you dispute my words, I am prepared to argue in defence
of them.

  Cookery, then, I maintain to be a flattery which takes the form of
medicine; and tiring, in like manner, is a flattery which takes the
form of gymnastic, and is knavish, false, ignoble, illiberal,
working deceitfully by the help of lines, and colours, and enamels,
and garments, and making men affect a spurious beauty to the neglect
of the true beauty which is given by gymnastic.

  I would rather not be tedious, and therefore I will only say,
after the manner of the geometricians (for I think that by this time
you will be able to follow)

    astiring : gymnastic :: cookery : medicine;
or rather,

    astiring : gymnastic :: sophistry : legislation;
and

    as cookery : medicine :: rhetoric : justice.

And this, I say, is the natural difference between the rhetorician and
the sophist, but by reason of their near connection, they are apt to
be jumbled up together; neither do they know what to make of
themselves, nor do other men know what to make of them. For if the
body presided over itself, and were not under the guidance of the
soul, and the soul did not discern and discriminate between cookery
and medicine, but the body was made the judge of them, and the rule of
judgment was the bodily delight which was given by them, then the word
of Anaxagoras, that word with which you, friend Polus, are so well
acquainted, would prevail far and wide: "Chaos" would come again,
and cookery, health, and medicine would mingle in an indiscriminate
mass. And now I have told you my notion of rhetoric, which is, in
relation to the soul, what cookery is to the body. I may have been
inconsistent in making a long speech, when I would not allow you to
discourse at length. But I think that I may be excused, because you
did not understand me, and could make no use of my answer when I spoke
shortly, and therefore I had to enter into explanation. And if I
show an equal inability to make use of yours, I hope that you will
speak at equal length; but if I am able to understand you, let me have
the benefit of your brevity, as is only fair: And now you may do
what you please with my answer.

  Pol. What do you mean? do you think that rhetoric is flattery?

  Soc. Nay, I said a part of flattery-if at your age, Polus, you
cannot remember, what will you do by-and-by, when you get older?

  Pol. And are the good rhetoricians meanly regarded in states,
under the idea that they are flatterers?

  Soc. Is that a question or the beginning of a speech?

  Pol. I am asking a question.

  Soc. Then my answer is, that they are not regarded at all.

  Pol. How not regarded? Have they not very great power in states?

  Soc. Not if you mean to say that power is a good to the possessor.

  Pol. And that is what I do mean to say.

  Soc. Then, if so, I think that they have the least power of all
the citizens.

  Pol. What! Are they not like tyrants? They kill and despoil and
exile any one whom they please.

  Soc. By the dog, Polus, I cannot make out at each deliverance of
yours, whether you are giving an opinion of your own, or asking a
question of me.

  Pol. I am asking a question of you.

  Soc. Yes, my friend, but you ask two questions at once.

  Pol. How two questions?

  Soc. Why, did you not say just now that the rhetoricians are like
tyrants, and that they kill and despoil or exile any one whom they
please?

  Pol. I did.

  Soc. Well then, I say to you that here are two questions in one, and
I will answer both of them. And I tell you, Polus, that rhetoricians
and tyrants have the least possible power in states, as I was just now
saying; for they do literally nothing which they will, but only what
they think best.

  Pol. And is not that a great power?

  Soc. Polus has already said the reverse.

  Soc. No, by the great-what do you call him?-not you, for you say
that power is a good to him who has the power.

  Pol. I do.

  Soc. And would you maintain that if a fool does what he think
best, this is a good, and would you call this great power?

  Pol. I should not.

  Soc. Then you must prove that the rhetorician is not a fool, and
that rhetoric is an art and not a flattery-and so you will have
refuted me; but if you leave me unrefuted, why, the rhetoricians who
do what they think best in states, and the tyrants, will have
nothing upon which to congratulate themselves, if as you say, power be
indeed a good, admitting at the same time that what is done without
sense is an evil.

  Pol. Yes; I admit that.

  Soc. How then can the rhetoricians or the tyrants have great power
in states, unless Polus can refute Socrates, and prove to him that
they do as they will?

  Pol. This fellow-

  Soc. I say that they do not do as they will-now refute me.

  Pol. Why, have you not already said that they do as they think best?

  Soc. And I say so still.

  Pol. Then surely they do as they will?

  Soc. I deny it.

  Pol. But they do what they think best?

  Soc. Aye.

  Pol. That, Socrates, is monstrous and absurd.

  Soc. Good words, good Polus, as I may say in your own peculiar
style; but if you have any questions to ask of me, either prove that I
am in error or give the answer yourself.

  Pol. Very well, I am willing to answer that I may know what you
mean.

  Soc. Do men appear to you to will that which they do, or to will
that further end for the sake of which they do a thing? when they take
medicine, for example, at the bidding of a physician, do they will the
drinking of the medicine which is painful, or the health for the
sake of which they drink?

  Pol. Clearly, the health.

  Soc. And when men go on a voyage or engage in business, they do
not will that which they are doing at the time; for who would desire
to take the risk of a voyage or the trouble of business?-But they
will, to have the wealth for the sake of which they go on a voyage.

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And is not this universally true? If a man does something for
the sake of something else, he wills not that which he does, but
that for the sake of which he does it.

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And are not all things either good or evil, or intermediate and
indifferent?

  Pol. To be sure, Socrates.

  Soc. Wisdom and health and wealth and the like you would call goods,
and their opposites evils?

  Pol. I should.

  Soc. And the things which are neither good nor evil, and which
partake sometimes of the nature of good and at other times of evil, or
of neither, are such as sitting, walking, running, sailing; or, again,
wood, stones, and the like:-these are the things which you call
neither good nor evil?

  Pol. Exactly so.

  Soc. Are these indifferent things done for the sake of the good,
or the good for the sake of the indifferent?

  Pol. Clearly, the indifferent for the sake of the good.

  Soc. When we walk we walk for the sake of the good, and under the
idea that it is better to walk, and when we stand we stand equally for
the sake of the good?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And when we kill a man we kill him or exile him or despoil
him of his goods, because, as we think, it will conduce to our good?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. Men who do any of these things do them for the sake of the
good?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And did we not admit that in doing something for the sake of
something else, we do not will those things which we do, but that
other thing for the sake of which we do them?

  Pol. Most true.

  Soc. Then we do not will simply to kill a man or to exile him or
to despoil him of his goods, but we will to do that which conduces
to our good, and if the act is not conducive to our good we do not
will it; for we will, as you say, that which is our good, but that
which is neither good nor evil, or simply evil, we do not will. Why
are you silent, Polus? Am I not right?

  Pol. You are right.

  Soc. Hence we may infer, that if any one, whether he be a tyrant
or a rhetorician, kills another or exiles another or deprives him of
his property, under the idea that the act is for his own interests
when really not for his own interests, he may be said to do what seems
best to him?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. But does he do what he wills if he does what is evil? Why do
you not answer?

  Pol. Well, I suppose not.

  Soc. Then if great power is a good as you allow, will such a one
have great power in a state?

  Pol. He will not.

  Soc. Then I was right in saying that a man may do what seems good to
him in a state, and not have great power, and not do what he wills?

  Pol. As though you, Socrates, would not like to have the power of
doing what seemed good to you in the state, rather than not; you would
not be jealous when you saw any one killing or despoiling or
imprisoning whom he pleased, Oh, no!

  Soc. Justly or unjustly, do you mean?

  Pol. In either case is he not equally to be envied?

  Soc. Forbear, Polus!

  Pol. Why "forbear"?

  Soc. Because you ought not to envy wretches who are not to be
envied, but only to pity them.

  Pol. And are those of whom spoke wretches?

  Soc. Yes, certainly they are.

  Pol. And so you think that he who slays any one whom he pleases, and
justly slays him, is pitiable and wretched?

  Soc. No, I do not say that of him: but neither do I think that he is
to be envied.

  Pol. Were you not saying just now that he is wretched?

  Soc. Yes, my friend, if he killed another unjustly, in which case he
is also to be pitied; and he is not to be envied if he killed him
justly.

  Pol. At any rate you will allow that he who is unjustly put to death
is wretched, and to be pitied?

  Soc. Not so much, Polus, as he who kills him, and not so much as
he who is justly killed.

  Pol. How can that be, Socrates?

  Soc. That may very well be, inasmuch as doing injustice is the
greatest of evils.

  Pol. But is it the greatest? Is not suffering injustice a greater
evil?

  Soc. Certainly not.

  Pol. Then would you rather suffer than do injustice?

  Soc. I should not like either, but if I must choose between them,
I would rather suffer than do.

  Pol. Then you would not wish to be a tyrant?

  Soc. Not if you mean by tyranny what I mean.

  Pol. I mean, as I said before, the power of doing whatever seems
good to you in a state, killing, banishing, doing in all things as you
like.

  Soc. Well then, illustrious friend, when I have said my say, do
you reply to me. Suppose that I go into a crowded Agora, and take a
dagger under my arm. Polus, I say to you, I have just acquired rare
power, and become a tyrant; for if I think that any of these men
whom you see ought to be put to death, the man whom I have a mind to
kill is as good as dead; and if I am disposed to break his head or
tear his garment, he will have his head broken or his garment torn
in an instant. Such is my great power in this city. And if you do
not believe me, and I show you the dagger, you would probably reply:
Socrates, in that sort of way any one may have great power-he may burn
any house which he pleases, and the docks and triremes of the
Athenians, and all their other vessels, whether public or
private-but can you believe that this mere doing as you think best
is great power?

  Pol. Certainly not such doing as this.

  Soc. But can you tell me why you disapprove of such a power?

  Pol. I can.

  Soc. Why then?

  Pol. Why, because he who did as you say would be certain to be
punished.

  Soc. And punishment is an evil?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And you would admit once more, my good sir, that great power is
a benefit to a man if his actions turn out to his advantage, and
that this is the meaning of great power; and if not, then his power is
an evil and is no power. But let us look at the matter in another
way do we not acknowledge that the things of which we were speaking,
the infliction of death, and exile, and the deprivation of property
are sometimes a good and sometimes not a good?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. About that you and I may be supposed to agree?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. Tell me, then, when do you say that they are good and when that
they are evil-what principle do you lay down?

  Pol. I would rather, Socrates, that you should answer as well as ask
that question.

  Soc. Well, Polus, since you would rather have the answer from me,
I say that they are good when they are just, and evil when they are
unjust.

  Pol. You are hard of refutation, Socrates, but might not a child
refute that statement?

  Soc. Then I shall be very grateful to the child, and equally
grateful to you if you will refute me and deliver me from my
foolishness. And I hope that refute me you will, and not weary of
doing good to a friend.

  Pol. Yes, Socrates, and I need not go far or appeal to antiquity;
events which happened only a few days ago are enough to refute you,
and to prove that many men who do wrong are happy.

  Soc. What events?

  Pol. You see, I presume, that Archelaus the son of Perdiccas is
now the ruler of Macedonia?

  Soc. At any rate I hear that he is.

  Pol. And do you think that he is happy or miserable?

  Soc. I cannot say, Polus, for I have never had any acquaintance with
him.

  Pol. And cannot you tell at once, and without having an acquaintance
with him, whether a man is happy?

  Soc. Most certainly not.

  Pol. Then clearly, Socrates, you would say that you did not even
know whether the great king was a happy man?

  Soc. And I should speak the truth; for I do not know how he stands
in the matter of education and justice.

  Pol. What! and does all happiness consist in this?

  Soc. Yes, indeed, Polus, that is my doctrine; the men and women
who are gentle and good are also happy, as I maintain, and the
unjust and evil are miserable.

  Pol. Then, according to your doctrine, the said Archelaus is
miserable?

  Soc. Yes, my friend, if he is wicked.

  Pol. That he is wicked I cannot deny; for he had no title at all
to the throne which he now occupies, he being only the son of a
woman who was the slave of Alcetas the brother of Perdiccas; he
himself therefore in strict right was the slave of Alcetas; and if
he had meant to do rightly he would have remained his slave, and then,
according to your doctrine, he would have been happy. But now he is
unspeakably miserable, for he has been guilty of the greatest
crimes: in the first place he invited his uncle and master, Alcetas,
to come to him, under the pretence that he would restore to him the
throne which Perdiccas has usurped, and after entertaining him and his
son Alexander, who was his own cousin, and nearly of an age with
him, and making them drunk, he threw them into a waggon and carried
them off by night, and slew them, and got both of them out of the way;
and when he had done all this wickedness he never discovered that he
was the most miserable of all men, was very far from repenting:
shall I tell you how he showed his remorse? he had a younger
brother, a child of seven years old, who was the legitimate son of
Perdiccas, and to him of right the kingdom belonged; Archelaus,
however, had no mind to bring him up as he ought and restore the
kingdom to him; that was not his notion of happiness; but not long
afterwards he threw him into a well and drowned him, and declared to
his mother Cleopatra that he had fallen in while running after a
goose, and had been killed. And now as he is the greatest criminal
of all the Macedonians, he may be supposed to be the most miserable
and not the happiest of them, and I dare say that there are many
Athenians, and you would be at the head of them, who would rather be
any other Macedonian than Archelaus!

  Soc. I praised you at first, Polus, for being a rhetorician rather
than a reasoner. And this, as I suppose, is the sort of argument
with which you fancy that a child might refute me, and by which I
stand refuted when I say that the unjust man is not happy. But, my
good friend, where is the refutation? I cannot admit a word which
you have been saying.

  Pol. That is because you will not; for you surely must think as I
do.

  Soc. Not so, my simple friend, but because you will refute me
after the manner which rhetoricians practise in courts of law. For
there the one party think that they refute the other when they bring
forward a number of witnesses of good repute in proof of their
allegations, and their adversary has only a single one or none at all.
But this kind of proof is of no value where truth is the aim; a man
may often be sworn down by a multitude of false witnesses who have a
great air of respectability. And in this argument nearly every one,
Athenian and stranger alike, would be on your side, if you should
bring witnesses in disproof of my statement-you may, if you will,
summon Nicias the son of Niceratus, and let his brothers, who gave the
row of tripods which stand in the precincts of Dionysus, come with
him; or you may summon Aristocrates, the son of Scellius, who is the
giver of that famous offering which is at Delphi; summon, if you will,
the whole house of Pericles, or any other great Athenian family whom
you choose-they will all agree with you: I only am left alone and
cannot agree, for you do not convince me; although you produce many
false witnesses against me, in the hope of depriving me of my
inheritance, which is the truth. But I consider that nothing worth
speaking of will have been effected by me unless I make you the one
witness of my words; nor by you, unless you make me the one witness of
yours; no matter about the rest of the world. For there are two ways
of refutation, one which is yours and that of the world in general;
but mine is of another sort-let us compare them, and see in what
they differ. For, indeed, we are at issue about matters which to
know is honourable and not to know disgraceful; to know or not to know
happiness and misery-that is the chief of them. And what knowledge can
be nobler? or what ignorance more disgraceful than this? And therefore
I will begin by asking you whether you do not think that a man who
is unjust and doing injustice can be happy, seeing that you think
Archelaus unjust, and yet happy? May I assume this to be your opinion?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. But I say that this is an impossibility-here is one point about
which we are at issue:-very good. And do you mean to say also that
if he meets with retribution and punishment he will still be happy?

  Pol. Certainly not; in that case he will be most miserable.

  Soc. On the other hand, if the unjust be not punished, then,
according to you, he will be happy?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. But in my opinion, Polus, the unjust or doer of unjust
actions is miserable in any case,-more miserable, however, if he be
not punished and does not meet with retribution, and less miserable if
he be punished and meets with retribution at the hands of gods and
men.

  Pol. You are maintaining a strange doctrine, Socrates.

  Soc. I shall try to make you agree with me, O my friend, for as a
friend I regard you. Then these are the points at issue between us-are
they not? I was saying that to do is worse than to suffer injustice?

  Pol. Exactly so.

  Soc. And you said the opposite?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. I said also that the wicked are miserable, and you refuted me?

  Pol. By Zeus, I did.

  Soc. In your own opinion, Polus.

  Pol. Yes, and I rather suspect that I was in the right.

  Soc. You further said that the wrong-doer is happy if he be
unpunished?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And I affirm that he is most miserable, and that those who
are punished are less miserable-are you going to refute this
proposition also?

  Pol. A proposition which is harder of refutation than the other,
Socrates.

  Soc. Say rather, Polus, impossible; for who can refute the truth?

  Pol. What do you mean? If a man is detected in an unjust attempt
to make himself a tyrant, and when detected is racked, mutilated,
has his eyes burned out, and after having had all sorts of great
injuries inflicted on him, and having seen his wife and children
suffer the like, is at last impaled or tarred and burned alive, will
he be happier than if he escape and become a tyrant, and continue
all through life doing what he likes and holding the reins of
government, the envy and admiration both of citizens and strangers? Is
that the paradox which, as you say, cannot be refuted?

  Soc. There again, noble Polus, you are raising hobgoblins instead of
refuting me; just now you were calling witnesses against me. But
please to refresh my memory a little; did you say-"in an unjust
attempt to make himself a tyrant"?

  Pol. Yes, I did.

  Soc. Then I say that neither of them will be happier than the
other-neither he who unjustly acquires a tyranny, nor he who suffers
in the attempt, for of two miserables one cannot be the happier, but
that he who escapes and becomes a tyrant is the more miserable of
the two. Do you laugh, Polus? Well, this is a new kind of
refutation-when any one says anything, instead of refuting him to
laugh at him.

  Pol. But do you not think, Socrates, that you have been sufficiently
refuted, when you say that which no human being will allow? Ask the
company.

  Soc. O Polus, I am not a public man, and only last year, when my
tribe were serving as Prytanes, and it became my duty as their
president to take the votes, there was a laugh at me, because I was
unable to take them. And as I failed then, you must not ask me to
count the suffrages of the company now; but if, as I was saying, you
have no better argument than numbers, let me have a turn, and do you
make trial of the sort of proof which, as I think, is required; for
I shall produce one witness only of the truth of my words, and he is
the person with whom I am arguing; his suffrage I know how to take;
but with the many I have nothing to do, and do not even address myself
to them. May I ask then whether you will answer in turn and have
your words put to the proof? For I certainly think that I and you
and every man do really believe, that to do is a greater evil than
to suffer injustice: and not to be punished than to be punished.

  Pol. And I should say neither I, nor any man: would you yourself,
for example, suffer rather than do injustice?

  Soc. Yes, and you, too; I or any man would.

  Pol. Quite the reverse; neither you, nor I, nor any man.

  Soc. But will you answer?

  Pol. To be sure, I will-for I am curious to hear what you can have
to say.

  Soc. Tell me, then, and you will know, and let us suppose that I
am beginning at the beginning: which of the two, Polus, in your
opinion, is the worst?-to do injustice or to suffer?

  Pol. I should say that suffering was worst.

  Soc. And which is the greater disgrace?-Answer.

  Pol. To do.

  Soc. And the greater disgrace is the greater evil?

  Pol. Certainly not.

  Soc. I understand you to say, if I am not mistaken, that the
honourable is not the same as the good, or the disgraceful as the
evil?

  Pol. Certainly not.

  Soc. Let me ask a question of you: When you speak of beautiful
things, such as bodies, colours, figures, sounds, institutions, do you
not call them beautiful in reference to some standard: bodies, for
example, are beautiful in proportion as they are useful, or as the
sight of them gives pleasure to the spectators; can you give any other
account of personal beauty?

  Pol. I cannot.

  Soc. And you would say of figures or colours generally that they
were beautiful, either by reason of the pleasure which they give, or
of their use, or both?

  Pol. Yes, I should.

  Soc. And you would call sounds and music beautiful for the same
reason?

  Pol. I should.

  Soc. Laws and institutions also have no beauty in them except in
so far as they are useful or pleasant or both?

  Pol. I think not.

  Soc. And may not the same be said of the beauty of knowledge?

  Pol. To be sure, Socrates; and I very much approve of your measuring
beauty by the standard of pleasure and utility.

  Soc. And deformity or disgrace may be equally measured by the
opposite standard of pain and evil?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. Then when of two beautiful things one exceeds in beauty, the
measure of the excess is to be taken in one or both of these; that
is to say, in pleasure or utility or both?

  Pol. Very true.

  Soc. And of two deformed things, that which exceeds in deformity
or disgrace, exceeds either in pain or evil-must it not be so?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. But then again, what was the observation which you just now
made, about doing and suffering wrong? Did you not say, that suffering
wrong was more evil, and doing wrong more disgraceful?

  Pol. I did.

  Soc. Then, if doing wrong is more disgraceful than suffering, the
more disgraceful must be more painful and must exceed in pain or in
evil or both: does not that also follow?

  Pol. Of course.

  Soc. First, then, let us consider whether the doing of injustice
exceeds the suffering in the consequent pain: Do the injurers suffer
more than the injured?

  Pol. No, Socrates; certainly not.

  Soc. Then they do not exceed in pain?

  Pol. No.

  Soc. But if not in pain, then not in both?

  Pol. Certainly not.

  Soc. Then they can only exceed in the other?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. That is to say, in evil?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. Then doing injustice will have an excess of evil, and will
therefore be a greater evil than suffering injustice?

  Pol. Clearly.

  Soc. But have not you and the world already agreed that to do
injustice is more disgraceful than to suffer?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And that is now discovered to be more evil?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And would you prefer a greater evil or a greater dishonour to a
less one? Answer, Polus, and fear not; for you will come to no harm if
you nobly resign yourself into the healing hand of the argument as
to a physician without shrinking, and either say "Yes" or "No" to me.

  Pol. I should say "No."

  Soc. Would any other man prefer a greater to a less evil?

  Pol. No, not according to this way of putting the case, Socrates.

  Soc. Then I said truly, Polus that neither you, nor I, nor any
man, would rather, do than suffer injustice; for to do injustice is
the greater evil of the two.

  Pol. That is the conclusion.

  Soc. You see, Polus, when you compare the two kinds of
refutations, how unlike they are. All men, with the exception of
myself, are of your way of thinking; but your single assent and
witness are enough for me-I have no need of any other, I take your
suffrage, and am regardless of the rest. Enough of this, and now let
us proceed to the next question; which is, Whether the greatest of
evils to a guilty man is to suffer punishment, as you supposed, or
whether to escape punishment is not a greater evil, as I supposed.
Consider:-You would say that to suffer punishment is another name
for being justly corrected when you do wrong?

  Pol. I should.

  Soc. And would you not allow that all just things are honourable
in so far as they are just? Please to reflect, and, tell me your
opinion.

  Pol. Yes, Socrates, I think that they are.

  Soc. Consider again:-Where there is an agent, must there not also be
a patient?

  Pol. I should say so.

  Soc. And will not the patient suffer that which the agent does,
and will not the suffering have the quality of the action? I mean, for
example, that if a man strikes, there must be something which is
stricken?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And if the striker strikes violently or quickly, that which
is struck will he struck violently or quickly?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And the suffering to him who is stricken is of the same
nature as the act of him who strikes?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And if a man burns, there is something which is burned?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And if he burns in excess or so as to cause pain, the thing
burned will be burned in the same way?

  Pol. Truly.

  Soc. And if he cuts, the same argument holds-there will be something
cut?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And if the cutting be great or deep or such as will cause pain,
the cut will be of the same nature?

  Pol. That is evident.

  Soc. Then you would agree generally to the universal proposition
which I was just now asserting: that the affection of the patient
answers to the affection of the agent?

  Pol. I agree.

  Soc. Then, as this is admitted, let me ask whether being punished is
suffering or acting?

  Pol. Suffering, Socrates; there can be no doubt of that.

  Soc. And suffering implies an agent?

  Pol. Certainly, Socrates; and he is the punisher.

  Soc. And he who punishes rightly, punishes justly?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And therefore he acts justly?

  Pol. Justly.

  Soc. Then he who is punished and suffers retribution, suffers
justly?

  Pol. That is evident.

  Soc. And that which is just has been admitted to be honourable?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. Then the punisher does what is honourable, and the punished
suffers what is honourable?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And if what is honourable, then what is good, for the
honourable is either pleasant or useful?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. Then he who is punished suffers what is good?

  Pol. That is true.

  Soc. Then he is benefited?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. Do I understand you to mean what I mean by the term
"benefited"? I mean, that if he be justly punished his soul is
improved.

  Pol. Surely.

  Soc. Then he who is punished is delivered from the evil of his soul?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And is he not then delivered from the greatest evil? Look at
the matter in this way:-In respect of a man's estate, do you see any
greater evil than poverty?

  Pol. There is no greater evil.

  Soc. Again, in a man's bodily frame, you would say that the evil
is weakness and disease and deformity?

  Pol. I should.

  Soc. And do you not imagine that the soul likewise has some evil
of her own?

  Pol. Of course.

  Soc. And this you would call injustice and ignorance and
cowardice, and the like?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. So then, in mind, body, and estate, which are three, you have
pointed out three corresponding evils-injustice, disease, poverty?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And which of the evils is the most disgraceful?-Is not the most
disgraceful of them injustice, and in general the evil of the soul?

  Pol. By far the most.

  Soc. And if the most disgraceful, then also the worst?

  Pol. What do you mean, Socrates?

  Soc. I mean to say, that is most disgraceful has been already
admitted to be most painful or hurtful, or both.

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And now injustice and all evil in the soul has been admitted by
to be most disgraceful?

  Pol. It has been admitted.

  Soc. And most disgraceful either because most painful and causing
excessive pain, or most hurtful, or both?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And therefore to be unjust and intemperate, and cowardly and
ignorant, is more painful than to be poor and sick?

  Pol. Nay, Socrates; the painfulness does not appear to me to
follow from your premises.

  Soc. Then, if, as you would argue, not more painful, the evil of the
soul is of all evils the most disgraceful; and the excess of
disgrace must be caused by some preternatural greatness, or
extraordinary hurtfulness of the evil.

  Pol. Clearly.

  Soc. And that which exceeds most in hurtfulness will be the greatest
of evils?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. Then injustice and intemperance, and in general the depravity
of the soul, are the greatest of evils!

  Pol. That is evident.

  Soc. Now, what art is there which delivers us from poverty? Does not
the art of making money?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And what art frees us from disease? Does not the art of
medicine?

  Pol. Very true.

  Soc. And what from vice and injustice? If you are not able to answer
at once, ask yourself whither we go with the sick, and to whom we take
them.

  Pol. To the physicians, Socrates.

  Soc. And to whom do we go with the unjust and intemperate?

  Pol. To the judges, you mean.

  Soc. -Who are to punish them?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And do not those who rightly punish others, punish them in
accordance with a certain rule of justice?

  Pol. Clearly.

  Soc. Then the art of money-making frees a man from poverty; medicine
from disease; and justice from intemperance and injustice?

  Pol. That is evident.

  Soc. Which, then, is the best of these three?

  Pol. Will you enumerate them?

  Soc. Money-making, medicine, and justice.

  Pol. Justice, Socrates, far excels the two others.

  Soc. And justice, if the best, gives the greatest pleasure or
advantage or both?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. But is the being healed a pleasant thing, and are those who are
being healed pleased?

  Pol. I think not.

  Soc. A useful thing, then?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. Yes, because the patient is delivered from a great evil; and
this is the advantage of enduring the pain-that you get well?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. And would he be the happier man in his bodily condition, who is
healed, or who never was out of health?

  Pol. Clearly he who was never out of health.

  Soc. Yes; for happiness surely does not consist in being delivered
from evils, but in never having had them.

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And suppose the case of two persons who have some evil in their
bodies, and that one of them is healed and delivered from evil, and
another is not healed, but retains the evil-which of them is the
most miserable?

  Pol. Clearly he who is not healed.

  Soc. And was not punishment said by us to be a deliverance from
the greatest of evils, which is vice?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And justice punishes us, and makes us more just, and is the
medicine of our vice?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. He, then, has the first place in the scale of happiness who has
never had vice in his soul; for this has been shown to be the greatest
of evils.

  Pol. Clearly.

  Soc. And he has the second place, who is delivered from vice?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. That is to say, he who receives admonition and rebuke and
punishment?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. Then he lives worst, who, having been unjust, has no
deliverance from injustice?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. That is, he lives worst who commits the greatest crimes, and
who, being the most unjust of men, succeeds in escaping rebuke or
correction or punishment; and this, as you say, has been
accomplished by Archelaus and other tyrants and rhetoricians and
potentates?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. May not their way of proceeding, my friend, be compared to
the conduct of a person who is afflicted with the worst of diseases
and yet contrives not to pay the penalty to the physician for his sins
against his constitution, and will not be cured, because, like a
child, he is afraid of the pain of being burned or cut:-Is not that
a parallel case?

  Pol. Yes, truly.

  Soc. He would seem as if he did not know the nature of health and
bodily vigour; and if we are right, Polus, in our previous
conclusions, they are in a like case who strive to evade justice,
which they see to be painful, but are blind to the advantage which
ensues from it, not knowing how far more miserable a companion a
diseased soul is than a diseased body; a soul, I say, which is corrupt
and unrighteous and unholy. And hence they do all that they can to
avoid punishment and to avoid being released from the greatest of
evils; they provide themselves with money and friends, and cultivate
to the utmost their powers of persuasion. But if we, Polus, are right,
do you see what follows, or shall we draw out the consequences in
form?

  Pol. If you please.

  Soc. Is it not a fact that injustice, and the doing of injustice, is
the greatest of evils?

  Pol. That is quite clear.

  Soc. And further, that to suffer punishment is the way to be
released from this evil?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And not to suffer, is to perpetuate the evil?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. To do wrong, then, is second only in the scale of evils; but to
do wrong and not to be punished, is first and greatest of all?

  Pol. That is true.

  Soc. Well, and was not this the point in dispute, my friend? You
deemed Archelaus happy, because he was a very great criminal and
unpunished: I, on the other hand, maintained that he or any other
who like him has done wrong and has not been punished, is, and ought
to be, the most miserable of all men; and that the doer of injustice
is more miserable than the sufferer; and he who escapes punishment,
more miserable than he who suffers.-Was not that what I said?

  Pol. Yes.

  Soc. And it has been proved to be true?

  Pol. Certainly.

  Soc. Well, Polus, but if this is true, where is the great use of
rhetoric? If we admit what has been just now said, every man ought
in every way to guard himself against doing wrong, for he will thereby
suffer great evil?

  Pol. True.

  Soc. And if he, or any one about whom he cares, does wrong, he ought
of his own accord to go where he will be immediately punished; he will
run to the judge, as he would to the physician, in order that the
disease of injustice may not be rendered chronic and become the
incurable cancer of the soul; must we not allow this consequence,
Polus, if our former admissions are to stand:-is any other inference
consistent with them?

  Pol. To that, Socrates, there can be but one answer.

  Soc. Then rhetoric is of no use to us, Polus, in helping a man to
excuse his own injustice, that of his parents or friends, or
children or country; but may be of use to any one who holds that
instead of excusing he ought to accuse-himself above all, and in the
next degree his family or any of his friends who may be doing wrong;
he should bring to light the iniquity and not conceal it, that so
the wrong-doer may suffer and be made whole; and he should even
force himself and others not to shrink, but with closed eyes like
brave men to let the physician operate with knife or searing iron, not
regarding the pain, in the hope of attaining the good and the
honourable; let him who has done things worthy of stripes, allow
himself to be scourged, if of bonds, to be bound, if of a fine, to
be fined, if of exile, to be exiled, if of death, to die, himself
being the first to accuse himself and his relations, and using
rhetoric to this end, that his and their unjust actions may be made
manifest, and that they themselves may be delivered from injustice,
which is the greatest evil. Then, Polus, rhetoric would indeed be
useful. Do you say "Yes" or "No" to that?

  Pol. To me, Socrates, what you are saying appears very strange,
though probably in agreement with your premises.

  Soc. Is not this the conclusion, if the premises are not disproven?

  Pol. Yes; it certainly is.

  Soc. And from the opposite point of view, if indeed it be our duty
to harm another, whether an enemy or not-I except the case of
self-defence-then I have to be upon my guard-but if my enemy injures a
third person, then in every sort of way, by word as well as deed, I
should try to prevent his being punished, or appearing before the
judge; and if he appears, I should contrive that he should escape, and
not suffer punishment: if he has stolen a sum of money, let him keep
what he has stolen and spend it on him and his, regardless of religion
and justice; and if he has done things worthy of death, let him not
die, but rather be immortal in his wickedness; or, if this is not
possible, let him at any rate be allowed to live as long as he can.
For such purposes, Polus, rhetoric may be useful, but is of small if
of any use to him who is not intending to commit injustice; at
least, there was no such use discovered by us in the previous
discussion.

  Cal. Tell me, Chaerephon, is Socrates in earnest, or is he joking?

  Chaer. I should say, Callicles, that he is in most profound earnest;
but you may well ask him

  Cal. By the gods, and I will. Tell me, Socrates, are you in earnest,
or only in jest? For if you are in earnest, and what you say is
true, is not the whole of human life turned upside down; and are we
not doing, as would appear, in everything the opposite of what we
ought to be doing?

  Soc. O Callicles, if there were not some community of feelings among
mankind, however varying in different persons-I mean to say, if
every man's feelings were peculiar to himself and were not shared by
the rest of his species-I do not see how we could ever communicate our
impressions to one another. I make this remark because I perceive that
you and I have a common feeling. For we are lovers both, and both of
us have two loves apiece:-I am the lover of Alcibiades, the son of
Cleinias-I and of philosophy; and you of the Athenian Demus, and of
Demus the son of Pyrilampes. Now, I observe that you, with all your
cleverness, do not venture to contradict your favourite in any word or
opinion of his; but as he changes you change, backwards and
forwards. When the Athenian Demus denies anything that you are
saying in the assembly, you go over to his opinion; and you do the
same with Demus, the fair young son of Pyrilampes. For you have not
the power to resist the words and ideas of your loves; and is a person
were to express surprise at the strangeness of what you say from
time to time when under their influence, you would probably reply to
him, if you were honest, that you cannot help saying what your loves
say unless they are prevented; and that you can only be silent when
they are. Now you must understand that my words are an echo too, and
therefore you need not wonder at me; but if you want to silence me,
silence philosophy, who is my love, for she is always telling me
what I am telling you, my friend; neither is she capricious like my
other love, for the son of Cleinias says one thing to-day and
another thing to-morrow, but philosophy is always true. She is the
teacher at whose words you are. now wondering, and you have heard
her yourself. Her you must refute, and either show, as I was saying,
that to do injustice and to escape punishment is not the worst of
all evils; or, if you leave her word unrefuted, by the dog the god
of Egypt, I declare, O Callicles, that Callicles will never be at
one with himself, but that his whole life, will be a discord. And yet,
my friend, I would rather that my lyre should be inharmonious, and
that there should be no music in the chorus which I provided; aye,
or that the whole world should be at odds with me, and oppose me,
rather than that I myself should be at odds with myself, and
contradict myself.

  Cal. O Socrates, you are a regular declaimer, and seem to be running
riot in the argument. And now you are declaiming in this way because
Polus has fallen into the same error himself of which he accused
Gorgias:-for he said that when Gorgias was asked by you, whether, if
some one came to him who wanted to learn rhetoric, and did not know
justice, he would teach him justice, Gorgias in his modesty replied
that he would, because he thought that mankind in general would be
displeased if he answered "No"; and then in consequence of this
admission, Gorgias was compelled to contradict himself, that being
just the sort of thing in which you delight. Whereupon Polus laughed
at you deservedly, as I think; but now he has himself fallen into
the same trap. I cannot say very much for his wit when he conceded
to you that to do is more dishonourable than to suffer injustice,
for this was the admission which led to his being entangled by you;
and because he was too modest to say what he thought, he had his mouth
stopped. For the truth is, Socrates, that you, who pretend to be
engaged in the pursuit of truth, are appealing now to the popular
and vulgar notions of right, which are not natural, but only
conventional. Convention and nature are generally at variance with one
another: and hence, if a person is too modest to say what he thinks,
he is compelled to contradict himself; and you, in your ingenuity
perceiving the advantage to be thereby gained, slyly ask of him who is
arguing conventionally a question which is to be determined by the
rule of nature; and if he is talking of the rule of nature, you slip
away to custom: as, for instance, you did in this very discussion
about doing and suffering injustice. When Polus was speaking of the
conventionally dishonourable, you assailed him from the point of
view of nature; for by the rule of nature, to suffer injustice is
the greater disgrace because the greater evil; but conventionally,
to do evil is the more disgraceful. For the suffering of injustice
is hot the part of a man, but of a slave, who indeed had better die
than live; since when he is wronged and trampled upon, he is unable to
help himself, or any other about whom he cares. The reason, as I
conceive, is that the makers of laws are the majority who are weak;
and they, make laws and distribute praises and censures with a view to
themselves and to their own interests; and they: terrify the
stronger sort of men, and those who are able to get the better of them
in order that they may not get the better of them; and they say,
that dishonesty is shameful and unjust; meaning, by the word
injustice, the desire of a man to have more than his neighbours; for
knowing their own inferiority, I suspect that they are too glad of
equality. And therefore the endeavour to have more than the many, is
conventionally said to be shameful and unjust, and is called
injustice, whereas nature herself intimates that it is just for the
better to have more than the worse, the more powerful than the weaker;
and in many ways she shows, among men as well as among animals, and
indeed among whole cities and races, that justice consists in the
superior ruling over and having more than the inferior. For on what
principle of justice did Xerxes invade Hellas, or his father the
Scythians? (not to speak of numberless other examples). Nay, but these
are the men who act according to nature; yes, by Heaven, and according
to the law of nature: not, perhaps, according to that artificial
law, which we invent and impose upon our fellows, of whom we take
the best and strongest from their youth upwards, and tame them like
young lions, -charming them with the sound of the voice, and saying to
them, that with equality they must be content, and that the equal is
the honourable and the just. But if there were a man who had
sufficient force, he would shake off and break through, and escape
from all this; he would trample under foot all our formulas and spells
and charms, and all our laws which are against nature: the slave would
rise in rebellion and be lord over us, and the light of natural
justice would shine forth. And this I take to be the sentiment of
Pindar, when he says in his poem, that

   Law is the king of all, of mortals as well as of immortals;

this, as he says,

   Makes might to be right, doing violence with highest hand; as I
infer from the deeds of Heracles, for without buying them-

-I do not remember the exact words, but the meaning is, that without
buying them, and without their being given to him, he carried off
the oxen of Geryon, according to the law of natural right, and that
the oxen and other possessions of the weaker and inferior properly
belong to the stronger and superior. And this is true, as you may
ascertain, if you will leave philosophy and go on to higher things:
for philosophy, Socrates, if pursued in moderation and at the proper
age, is an elegant accomplishment, but too much philosophy is the ruin
of human life. Even if a man has good parts, still, if he carries
philosophy into later life, he is necessarily ignorant of all those
things which a gentleman and a person of honour ought to know; he is
inexperienced in the laws of the State, and in the language which
ought to be used in the dealings of man with man, whether private or
public, and utterly ignorant of the pleasures and desires of mankind
and of human character in general. And people of this sort, when
they betake themselves to politics or business, are as ridiculous as I
imagine the politicians to be, when they make their appearance in
the arena of philosophy. For, as Euripides says,

   Every man shines in that and pursues that, and devotes the greatest
portion of the day to that in which he most excels,

but anything in which he is inferior, he avoids and depreciates, and
praises the opposite partiality to himself, and because he from that
he will thus praise himself. The true principle is to unite them.
Philosophy, as a part of education, is an excellent thing, and there
is no disgrace to a man while he is young in pursuing such a study;
but when he is more advanced in years, the thing becomes ridiculous,
and I feel towards philosophers as I do towards those who lisp and
imitate children. For I love to see a little child, who is not of an
age to speak plainly, lisping at his play; there is an appearance of
grace and freedom in his utterance, which is natural to his childish
years. But when I hear some small creature carefully articulating
its words, I am offended; the sound is disagreeable, and has to my
ears the twang of slavery. So when I hear a man lisping, or see him
playing like a child, his behaviour appears to me ridiculous and
unmanly and worthy of stripes. And I have the same feeling about
students of philosophy; when I see a youth thus engaged-the study
appears to me to be in character, and becoming a man of liberal
education, and him who neglects philosophy I regard as an inferior
man, who will never aspire to anything great or noble. But if I see
him continuing the study in later life, and not leaving off, I
should like to beat him, Socrates; for, as I was saying, such a one,
even though he have good natural parts, becomes effeminate. He flies
from the busy centre and the market-place, in which, as the poet says,
men become distinguished; he creeps into a corner for the rest of
his life, and talks in a whisper with three or four admiring you,
but never speaks out like a freeman in a satisfactory manner. Now I,
Socrates, am very well inclined towards you, and my feeling may be
compared with that of Zethus towards Amphion, in the play of
Euripides, whom I was mentioning just now: for I am disposed to say to
you much what Zethus said to his brother, that you, Socrates, are
careless about the things of which you ought to be careful; and that
you

    Who have a soul so noble, are remarkable for a puerile exterior;

    Neither in a court of justice could you state a case, or give any

        reason or proof, offer valiant counsel on another's behalf.

And you must not be offended, my dear Socrates, for I am speaking
out of good-will towards you, if I ask whether you are not ashamed
of being thus defenceless; which I affirm to be the condition not of
you only but of all those who will carry the study of philosophy too
far. For suppose that some one were to take you, or any one of your
sort, off to prison, declaring that you had done wrong when you had
done no wrong, you must allow that you would not know what to
do:-there you would stand giddy and gaping, and not having a word to
say; and when you went up before the Court, even if the accuser were a
poor creature and not good for much, you would die if he were disposed
to claim the penalty of death. And yet, Socrates, what is the value of

  An art which converts a man of sense into a fool,

who is helpless, and has no power to save either himself or others,
when he is in the greatest danger and is going to be despoiled by
his enemies of all his goods, and has to live, simply deprived of
his rights of citizenship?-he being a man who, if I may use the
expression, may be boxed on the ears with impunity. Then, my good
friend, take my advice, and refute no more:

    Learn the philosophy of business, and acquire the reputation

        of wisdom.

    But leave to others these niceties,

whether they are to be described as follies or absurdities:

    For they will only

    Give you poverty for the inmate of your dwelling.

  Cease, then, emulating these paltry splitters of words, and
emulate only the man of substance and honour, who is well to do.

  Soc. If my soul, Callicles, were made of gold, should I not
rejoice to discover one of those stones with which they test gold, and
the very best possible one to which I might bring my soul; and if
the stone and I agreed in approving of her training, then I should
know that I was in a satisfactory state, and that no other test was
needed by me.

  Cal. What is your meaning, Socrates?

  Soc. I will tell you; I think that I have found in you the desired
touchstone.

  Cal. Why?

  Soc. Because I am sure that if you agree with me in any of the
opinions which my soul forms, I have at last found the truth indeed.
For I consider that if a man is to make a complete trial of the good
or evil of the soul, he ought to have three qualities-knowledge,
good-will, outspokenness, which are all possessed by you. Many whom
I meet are unable to make trial of me, because they are not wise as
you are; others are wise, but they will not tell me the truth, because
they have not the same interest in me which you have; and these two
strangers, Gorgias and Polus, are undoubtedly wise men and my very
good friends, but they are not outspoken enough, and they are too
modest. Why, their modesty is so great that they are driven to
contradict themselves, first one and then the other of them, in the
face of a large company, on matters of the highest moment. But you
have all the qualities in which these others are deficient, having
received an excellent education; to this many Athenians can testify.
And are my friend. Shall I tell you why I think so? I know that you,
Callicles, and Tisander of Aphidnae, and Andron the son of
Androtion, and Nausicydes of the deme of Cholarges, studied
together: there were four of you, and I once heard you advising with
one another as to the extent to which the pursuit of philosophy should
be carried, and, as I know, you came to the conclusion that the
study should not be pushed too much into detail. You were cautioning
one another not to be overwise; you were afraid that too much wisdom
might unconsciously to yourselves be the ruin of you. And now when I
hear you giving the same advice to me which you then gave to your most
intimate friends, I have a sufficient evidence of your real goodwill
to me. And of the frankness of your nature and freedom from modesty
I am assured by yourself, and the assurance is confirmed by your
last speech. Well then, the inference in the present case clearly
is, that if you agree with me in an argument about any point, that
point will have been sufficiently tested by us, and will not require
to be submitted to any further test. For you could not have agreed
with me, either from lack of knowledge or from superfluity of modesty,
nor yet from a desire to deceive me, for you are my friend, as you
tell me yourself. And therefore when you and I are agreed, the
result will be the attainment of perfect truth. Now there is no nobler
enquiry, Callicles, than that which you censure me for making,-What
ought the character of a man to be, and what his pursuits, and how far
is he to go, both in maturer years and in youth? For be assured that
if I err in my own conduct I do not err intentionally, but from
ignorance. Do not then desist from advising me, now that you have
begun, until I have learned clearly what this is which I am to
practise, and how I may acquire it. And if you find me assenting to
your words, and hereafter not doing that to which I assented, call
me "dolt," and deem me unworthy of receiving further instruction. Once
more, then, tell me what you and Pindar mean by natural justice: Do
you not mean that the superior should take the property of the
inferior by force; that the better should rule the worse, the noble
have more than the mean? Am I not right in my recollection?

  Cal. Yes; that is what I was saying, and so I still aver.

  Soc. And do you mean by the better the same as the superior? for I
could not make out what you were saying at the time-whether you
meant by the superior the stronger, and that the weaker must obey
the stronger, as you seemed to imply when you said that great cities
attack small ones in accordance with-natural right, because they are
superior and stronger, as though the superior and stronger and
better were the same; or whether the better may be also the inferior
and weaker, and the superior the worse, or whether better is to be
defined in the same way as superior: this is the point which I want to
have cleared up. Are the superior and better and stronger the same
or different?

  Cal. I say unequivocally that they are the same.

  Soc. Then the many are by nature to the one, against whom, as you
were saying, they make the laws?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. Then the laws of the many are the laws of the superior?

  Cal. Very true.

  Soc. Then they are the laws of the better; for the superior class
are far better, as you were saying?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And since they are superior, the laws which are made by them
are by nature good?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And are not the many of opinion, as you were lately saying,
that justice is equality, and that to do is more disgraceful than to
suffer injustice?-is that so or not? Answer, Callicles, and let no
modesty be: found to come in the way; do the many think, or do they
not think thus?-I must beg of you to answer, in order that if you
agree with me I may fortify myself by the assent of so competent an
authority.

  Cal. Yes; the opinion of the many is what you say.

  Soc. Then not only custom but nature also affirms that to do is more
disgraceful than to suffer injustice, and that justice is equality; so
that you seem to have been wrong in your former assertion, when
accusing me you said that nature and custom are opposed, and that I,
knowing this, was dishonestly playing between them, appealing to
custom when the argument is about nature, and to nature when the
argument is about custom?

  Cal. This man will never cease talking nonsense. At your age,
Socrates, are you not ashamed to be catching at words and chuckling
over some verbal slip? do you not see-have I not told you already,
that by superior I mean better: do you imagine me to say, that if a
rabble of slaves and nondescripts, who are of no use except perhaps
for their physical strength, get together their ipsissima verba are
laws?

  Soc. Ho! my philosopher, is that your line?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. I was thinking, Callicles, that something of the kind must have
been in your mind, and that is why I repeated the question-What is the
superior? I wanted to know clearly what you meant; for you surely do
not think that two men are better than one, or that your slaves are
better than you because they are stronger? Then please to begin again,
and tell me who the better are, if they are not the stronger; and I
will ask you, great Sir, to be a little milder in your instructions,
or I shall have to run away from you.

  Cal. You are ironical.

  Soc. No, by the hero Zethus, Callicles, by whose aid you were just
now saying many ironical things against me, I am not:-tell me, then,
whom you mean, by the better?

  Cal. I mean the more excellent.

  Soc. Do you not see that you are yourself using words which have
no meaning and that you are explaining nothing?-will you tell me
whether you mean by the better and superior the wiser, or if not,
whom?

  Cal. Most assuredly, I do mean the wiser.

  Soc. Then according to you, one wise man may often be superior to
ten thousand fools, and he ought them, and they ought to be his
subjects, and he ought to have more than they should. This is what I
believe that you mean (and you must not suppose that I am
word-catching), if you allow that the one is superior to the ten
thousand?

  Cal. Yes; that is what I mean, and that is what I conceive to be
natural justice-that the better and wiser should rule have more than
the inferior.

  Soc. Stop there, and let me ask you what you would say in this case:
Let us suppose that we are all together as we are now; there are
several of us, and we have a large common store of meats and drinks,
and there are all sorts of persons in our company having various
degrees of strength and weakness, and one of us, being physician, is
wiser in the matter of food than all the rest, and he is probably
stronger than some and not so strong as others of us-will he not,
being wiser, be also better than we are, and our superior in this
matter of food?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. Either, then, he will have a larger share of the meats and
drinks, because he is better, or he will have the distribution of
all of them by reason of his authority, but he will not expend or make
use of a larger share of them on his own person, or if he does, he
will be punished-his share will exceed that of some, and be less
than that of others, and if he be the weakest of all, he being the
best of all will have the smallest share of all, Callicles:-am I not
right, my friend?

  Cal. You talk about meats and drinks and physicians and other
nonsense; I am not speaking of them.

  Soc. Well, but do you admit that the wiser is the better? Answer
"Yes" or "No."

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And ought not the better to have a larger share?

  Cal. Not of meats and drinks.

  Soc. I understand: then, perhaps, of coats -the skilfullest weaver
ought to have the largest coat, and the greatest number of them, and
go about clothed in the best and finest of them?

  Cal. Fudge about coats!

  Soc. Then the skilfullest and best in making shoes ought to have the
advantage in shoes; the shoemaker, clearly, should walk about in the
largest shoes, and have the greatest number of them?

  Cal. Fudge about shoes! What nonsense are you talking?

  Soc. Or, if this is not your meaning, perhaps you would say that the
wise and good and true husbandman should actually have a larger
share of seeds, and have as much seed as possible for his own land?

  Cal. How you go on, always talking in the same way, Socrates!

  Soc. Yes, Callicles, and also about the same things.

  Cal. Yes, by the Gods, you are literally always talking of
cobblers and fullers and cooks and doctors, as if this had to do
with our argument.

  Soc. But why will you not tell me in what a man must be superior and
wiser in order to claim a larger share; will you neither accept a
suggestion, nor offer one?

  Cal. I have already told you. In the first place, I mean by
superiors not cobblers or cooks, but wise politicians who understand
the administration of a state, and who are not only wise, but also
valiant and able to carry. out their designs, and not the men to faint
from want of soul.

  Soc. See now, most excellent Callicles, how different my charge
against you is from that which you bring against me, for you
reproach me with always saying the same; but I reproach you with never
saying the same about the same things, for at one time you were
defining the better and the superior to be the stronger, then again as
the wiser, and now you bring forward a new notion; the superior and
the better are now declared by you to be the more courageous: I
wish, my good friend, that you would tell me once for all, whom you
affirm to be the better and superior, and in what they are better?

  Cal. I have already told you that I mean those who are wise and
courageous in the administration of a state-they ought to be the
rulers of their states, and justice consists in their having more than
their subjects.

  Soc. But whether rulers or subjects will they or will they not
have more than themselves, my friend?

  Cal. What do you mean?

  Soc. I mean that every man is his own ruler; but perhaps you think
that there is no necessity for him to rule himself; he is only
required to rule others?

  Cal. What do you mean by his "ruling over himself"?

  Soc. A simple thing enough; just what is commonly said, that a man
should be temperate and master of himself, and ruler of his own
pleasures and passions.

  Cal. What innocence! you mean those fools-the temperate?

  Soc. Certainly:-any one may know that to be my meaning.

  Cal. Quite so, Socrates; and they are really fools, for how can a
man be happy who is the servant of anything? On the contrary, I
plainly assert, that he who would truly live ought to allow his
desires to wax to the uttermost, and not to chastise them; but when
they have grown to their greatest he should have courage and
intelligence to minister to them and to satisfy all his longings.
And this I affirm to be natural justice and nobility. To this
however the many cannot attain; and they blame the strong man
because they are ashamed of their own weakness, which they desire to
conceal, and hence they say that intemperance is base. As I have
remarked already, they enslave the nobler natures, and being unable to
satisfy their pleasures, they praise temperance and justice out of
their own cowardice. For if a man had been originally the son of a
king, or had a nature capable of acquiring an empire or a tyranny or
sovereignty, what could be more truly base or evil than temperance--to
a man like him, I say, who might freely be enjoying every good, and
has no one to stand in his way, and yet has admitted custom and reason
and the opinion of other men to be lords over him?-must not he be in a
miserable plight whom the reputation of justice and temperance hinders
from giving more to his friends than to his enemies, even though he be
a ruler in his city? Nay, Socrates, for you profess to be a votary
of the truth, and the truth is this:-that luxury and intemperance
and licence, if they be provided with means, are virtue and
happiness-all the rest is a mere bauble, agreements contrary to
nature, foolish talk of men, nothing worth.

  Soc. There is a noble freedom, Callicles, in your way of approaching
the argument; for what you say is what the rest of the world think,
but do not like to say. And I must beg of you to persevere, that the
true rule of human life may become manifest. Tell me, then:-you say,
do you not, that in the rightly-developed man the passions ought not
to be controlled, but that we should let them grow to the utmost and
somehow or other satisfy them, and that this is virtue?

  Cal. Yes; I do.

  Soc. Then those who want nothing are not truly said to be happy?

  Cal. No indeed, for then stones and dead men would be the happiest
of all.

  Soc. But surely life according to your view is an awful thing; and
indeed I think that Euripides may have been right in saying,

     Who knows if life be not death and death life;

and that we are very likely dead; I have heard a philosopher say
that at this moment we are actually dead, and that the body (soma)
is our tomb (sema), and that the part of the soul which is the seat of
the desires is liable to be tossed about by words and blown up and
down; and some ingenious person, probably a Sicilian or an Italian,
playing with the word, invented a tale in which he called the
soul-because of its believing and make-believe nature-a vessel, and
the ignorant he called the uninitiated or leaky, and the place in
the souls of the uninitiated in which the desires are seated, being
the intemperate and incontinent part, he compared to a vessel full
of holes, because it can never be satisfied. He is not of your way
of thinking, Callicles, for he declares, that of all the souls in
Hades, meaning the invisible world these uninitiated or leaky
persons are the most miserable, and that they pour water into a vessel
which is full of holes out of a colander which is similarly
perforated. The colander, as my informer assures me, is the soul,
and the soul which he compares to a colander is the soul of the
ignorant, which is likewise full of holes, and therefore
incontinent, owing to a bad memory and want of faith. These notions
are strange enough, but they show the principle which, if I can, I
would fain prove to you; that you should change your mind, and,
instead of the intemperate and insatiate life, choose that which is
orderly and sufficient and has a due provision for daily needs. Do I
make any impression on you, and are you coming over to the opinion
that the orderly are happier than the intemperate? Or do I fail to
persuade you, and, however many tales I rehearse to you, do you
continue of the same opinion still?

  Cal. The latter, Socrates, is more like the truth.

  Soc. Well, I will tell you another image, which comes out of the
same school:-Let me request you to consider how far you would accept
this as an account of the two lives of the temperate and intemperate
in a figure:-There are two men, both of whom have a number of casks;
the one man has his casks sound and full, one of wine, another of
honey, and a third of milk, besides others filled with other
liquids, and the streams which fill them are few and scanty, and he
can only obtain them with a great deal of toil and difficulty; but
when his casks are once filled he has need to feed them anymore, and
has no further trouble with them or care about them. The other, in
like manner, can procure streams, though not without difficulty; but
his vessels are leaky and unsound, and night and day he is compelled
to be filling them, and if he pauses for a moment, he is in an agony
of pain. Such are their respective lives:-And now would you say that
the life of the intemperate is happier than that of the temperate?
Do I not convince you that the opposite is the truth?

  Cal. You do not convince me, Socrates, for the one who has filled
himself has no longer any pleasure left; and this, as I was just now
saying, is the life of a stone: he has neither joy nor sorrow after he
is once filled; but the pleasure depends on the superabundance of
the influx.

  Soc. But the more you pour in, the greater the waste; and the
holes must be large for the liquid to escape.

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. The life which you are now depicting is not that of a dead man,
or of a stone, but of a cormorant; you mean that he is to be hungering
and eating?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And he is to be thirsting and drinking?

  Cal. Yes, that is what I mean; he is to have all his desires about
him, and to be able to live happily in the gratification of them.

  Soc. Capital, excellent; go on as you have begun, and have no shame;
I, too, must disencumber myself of shame: and first, will you tell
me whether you include itching and scratching, provided you have
enough of them and pass your life in scratching, in your notion of
happiness?

  Cal. What a strange being you are, Socrates! a regular mob-orator.

  Soc. That was the reason, Callicles, why I scared Polus and Gorgias,
until they were too modest to say what they thought; but you will
not be too modest and will not be scared, for you are a brave man. And
now, answer my question.

  Cal. I answer, that even the scratcher would live pleasantly.

  Soc. And if pleasantly, then also happily?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. But what if the itching is not confined to the head? Shall I
pursue the question? And here, Callicles, I would have you consider
how you would reply if consequences are pressed upon you, especially
if in the last resort you are asked, whether the life of a catamite is
not terrible, foul, miserable? Or would you venture to say, that
they too are happy, if they only get enough of what they want?

  Cal. Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of introducing such topics
into the argument?

  Soc. Well, my fine friend, but am I the introducer of these
topics, or he who says without any qualification that all who feel
pleasure in whatever manner are happy, and who admits of no
distinction between good and bad pleasures? And I would still ask,
whether you say that pleasure and good are the same, or whether
there is some pleasure which is not a good?

  Cal. Well, then, for the sake of consistency, I will say that they
are the same.

  Soc. You are breaking the original agreement, Callicles, and will no
longer be a satisfactory companion in the search after truth, if you
say what is contrary to your real opinion.

  Cal. Why, that is what you are doing too, Socrates.

  Soc. Then we are both doing wrong. Still, my dear friend, I would
ask you to consider whether pleasure, from whatever source derived, is
the good; for, if this be true, then the disagreeable consequences
which have been darkly intimated must follow, and many others.

  Cal. That, Socrates, is only your opinion.

  Soc. And do you, Callicles, seriously maintain what you are saying?

  Cal. Indeed I do.

  Soc. Then, as you are in earnest, shall we proceed with the
argument?

  Cal. By all means.

  Soc. Well, if you are willing to proceed, determine this question
for me:-There is something, I presume, which you would call knowledge?

  Cal. There is.

  Soc. And were you not saying just now, that some courage implied
knowledge?

  Cal. I was.

  Soc. And you were speaking of courage and knowledge as two things
different from one another?

  Cal. Certainly I was.

  Soc. And would you say that pleasure and knowledge are the same,
or not the same?

  Cal. Not the same, O man of wisdom.

  Soc. And would you say that courage differed from pleasure?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. Well, then, let us remember that Callicles, the Acharnian, says
that pleasure and good are the same; but that knowledge and courage
are not the same, either with one another, or with the good.

  Cal. And what does our friend Socrates, of Foxton, say -does he
assent to this, or not?

  Soc. He does not assent; neither will Callicles, when he sees
himself truly. You will admit, I suppose, that good and evil fortune
are opposed to each other?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And if they are opposed to each other, then, like health and
disease, they exclude one another; a man cannot have them both, or
be without them both, at the same time?

  Cal. What do you mean?

  Soc. Take the case of any bodily affection:-a man may have the
complaint in his eyes which is called ophthalmia?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. But he surely cannot have the same eyes well and sound at the
same time?

  Cal. Certainly not.

  Soc. And when he has got rid of his ophthalmia, has he got rid of
the health of his eyes too? Is the final result, that he gets rid of
them both together?

  Cal. Certainly not.

  Soc. That would surely be marvellous and absurd?

  Cal. Very.

  Soc. I suppose that he is affected by them, and gets rid of them
in turns?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And he may have strength and weakness in the same way, by fits?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Or swiftness and slowness?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. And does he have and not have good and happiness, and their
opposites, evil and misery, in a similar alternation?

  Cal. Certainly he has.

  Soc. If then there be anything which a man has and has not at the
same time, clearly that cannot be good and evil-do we agree? Please
not to answer without consideration.

  Cal. I entirely agree.

  Soc. Go back now to our former admissions.-Did you say that to
hunger, I mean the mere state of hunger, was pleasant or painful?

  Cal. I said painful, but that to eat when you are hungry is
pleasant.

  Soc. I know; but still the actual hunger is painful: am I not right?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And thirst, too, is painful?

  Cal. Yes, very.

  Soc. Need I adduce any more instances, or would you agree that all
wants or desires are painful?

  Cal. I agree, and therefore you need not adduce any more instances.

   Soc. Very good. And you would admit that to drink, when you are
thirsty, is pleasant?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And in the sentence which you have just uttered, the word
"thirsty" implies pain?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And the word "drinking" is expressive of pleasure, and of the
satisfaction of the want?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. There is pleasure in drinking?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. When you are thirsty?

  Soc. And in pain?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Do you see the inference:-that pleasure and pain are
simultaneous, when you say that being thirsty, you drink? For are they
not simultaneous, and do they not affect at the same time the same
part, whether of the soul or the body?-which of them is affected
cannot be supposed to be of any consequence: Is not this true?

  Cal. It is.

  Soc. You said also, that no man could have good and evil fortune
at the same time?

  Cal. Yes, I did.

  Soc. But, you admitted that when in pain a man might also have
pleasure?

  Cal. Clearly.

  Soc. Then pleasure is not the same as good fortune, or pain the same
as evil fortune, and therefore the good is not the same as the
pleasant?

  Cal. I wish I knew, Socrates, what your quibbling means.

  Soc. You know, Callicles, but you affect not to know.

  Cal. Well, get on, and don't keep fooling: then you will know what a
wiseacre you are in your admonition of me.

  Soc. Does not a man cease from his thirst and from his pleasure in
drinking at the same time?

  Cal. I do not understand what you are saying.

  Gor. Nay, Callicles, answer, if only for our sakes;-we should like
to hear the argument out.

  Cal. Yes, Gorgias, but I must complain of the habitual trifling of
Socrates; he is always arguing about little and unworthy questions.

  Gor. What matter? Your reputation, Callicles, is not at stake. Let
Socrates argue in his own fashion.

  Cal. Well, then, Socrates, you shall ask these little peddling
questions, since Gorgias wishes to have them.

  Soc. I envy you, Callicles, for having been initiated into the great
mysteries before you were initiated into the lesser. I thought that
this was not allowable, But to return to our argument:-Does not a
man cease from thirsting and from pleasure of drinking at the same
moment?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. And if he is hungry, or has any other desire, does he not cease
from the desire and the pleasure at the same moment?

  Cal. Very true.

  Soc. Then he ceases from pain and pleasure at the same moment?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. But he does not cease from good and evil at the same moment, as
you have admitted: do you still adhere to what you said?

  Cal. Yes, I do; but what is the inference?

  Soc. Why, my friend, the inference is that the good is not the
same as the pleasant, or the evil the same as the painful; there is
a cessation of pleasure and pain at the same moment; but not of good
and evil, for they are different. How then can pleasure be the same as
good, or pain as evil? And I would have you look at the matter in
another light, which could hardly, I think, have been considered by
you identified them: Are not the good they have good present with
them, as the beautiful are those who have beauty present with them?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And do you call the fools and cowards good men? For you were
saying just now that the courageous and the wise are the good would
you not say so?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. And did you never see a foolish child rejoicing?

  Cal. Yes, I have.

  Soc. And a foolish man too?

  Cal. Yes, certainly; but what is your drift?

  Soc. Nothing particular, if you will only answer.

  Cal. Yes, I have.

  Soc. And did you ever see a sensible man rejoicing or sorrowing?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Which rejoice and sorrow most-the wise or the foolish?

  Cal. They are much upon a par, I think, in that respect.

  Soc. Enough: And did you ever see a coward in battle?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. And which rejoiced most at the departure of the enemy, the
coward or the brave?

  Cal. I should say "most" of both; or at any rate, they rejoiced
about equally.

  Soc. No matter; then the cowards, and not only the brave, rejoice?

  Cal. Greatly.

  Soc. And the foolish; so it would seem?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And are only the cowards pained at the approach of their
enemies, or are the brave also pained?

  Cal. Both are pained.

  Soc. And are they equally pained?

  Cal. I should imagine that the cowards are more pained.

  Soc. And are they better pleased at the enemy's departure?

  Cal. I dare say.

  Soc. Then are the foolish and the wise and the cowards and the brave
all pleased and pained, as you were saying, in nearly equal degree;
but are the cowards more pleased and pained than the brave?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. But surely the wise and brave are the good, and the foolish and
the cowardly are the bad?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then the good and the bad are pleased and pained in a nearly
equal degree?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then are the good and bad good and bad in a nearly equal
degree, or have the bad the advantage both in good and evil? [i.e.
in having more pleasure and more pain.]

  Cal I really do not know what you mean.

  Soc. Why, do you not remember saying that the good were good because
good was present with them, and the evil because evil; and that
pleasures were goods and pains evils?

  Cal. Yes, I remember.

  Soc. And are not these pleasures or goods present to those who
rejoice-if they do rejoice?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. Then those who rejoice are good when goods are present with
them?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And those who are in pain have evil or sorrow present with
them?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And would you still say that the evil are evil by reason of the
presence of evil?

  Cal. I should.

  Soc. Then those who rejoice are good, and those who are in pain
evil?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. The degrees of good and evil vary with the degrees of
pleasure and of pain?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Have the wise man and the fool, the brave and the coward, joy
and pain in nearly equal degrees? or would you say that the coward has
more?

  Cal. I should say that he has.

  Soc. Help me then to draw out the conclusion which follows from
our admissions; for it is good to repeat and review what is good twice
and thrice over, as they say. Both the wise man and the brave man we
allow to be good?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And the foolish man and the coward to be evil?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. And he who has joy is good?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And he who is in pain is evil?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. The good and evil both have joy and pain, but, perhaps, the
evil has more of them?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then must we not infer, that the bad man is as good and bad
as the good, or, perhaps, even better?-is not this a further inference
which follows equally with the preceding from the assertion that the
good and the pleasant are the same:-can this be denied, Callicles?

  Cal. I have been listening and making admissions to you, Socrates;
and I remark that if a person grants you anything in play, you, like a
child, want to keep hold and will not give it back. But do you
really suppose that I or any other human being denies that some
pleasures are good and others bad?

  Soc. Alas, Callicles, how unfair you are! you certainly treat me
as if I were a child, sometimes saying one thing, and then another, as
if you were meaning to deceive me. And yet I thought at first that you
were my friend, and would not have deceived me if you could have
helped. But I see that I was mistaken; and now I suppose that I must
make the best of a bad business, as they said of old, and take what
I can get out of you.-Well, then, as I understand you to say, I may
assume that some pleasures are good and others evil?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. The beneficial are good, and the hurtful are evil?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. And the beneficial are those which do some good, and the
hurtful are those which do some evil?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Take, for example, the bodily pleasures of eating and drinking,
which were just now mentioning-you mean to say that those which
promote health, or any other bodily excellence, are good, and their
opposites evil?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. And in the same way there are good pains and there are evil
pains?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. And ought we not to choose and use the good pleasures and
pains?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. But not the evil?

  Cal. Clearly.

  Soc. Because, if you remember, Polus and I have agreed that all
our actions are to be done for the sake of the good-and will you agree
with us in saying, that the good is the end of all our actions, and
that all our actions are to be done for the sake of the good, and
not the good, for of them?-will you add a third vote to our two?

  Cal. I will.

  Soc. Then pleasure, like everything else, is to be sought for the
sake of that which is good, and not that which is good for the sake of
pleasure?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. But can every man choose what pleasures are good and what are
evil, or must he have art or knowledge of them in detail?

  Cal. He must have art.

  Soc. Let me now remind you of what I was saying to Gorgias and
Polus; I was saying, as you will not have forgotten, that there were
some processes which aim only at pleasure, and know nothing of a
better and worse, and there are other processes which know good and
evil. And I considered that cookery, which I do not call an art, but
only an experience, was of the former class, which is concerned with
pleasure, and that the art of medicine was of the class which is
concerned with the good. And now, by the god of friendship, I must beg
you, Callicles, not to jest, or to imagine that I am jesting with you;
do not answer at random and contrary to your real opinion-for you will
observe that we are arguing about the way of human life; and to a
man who has any sense at all, what question can be more serious than
this?-whether he should follow after that way of life to which you
exhort me, and act what you call the manly part of speaking in the
assembly, and cultivating rhetoric, and engaging in public affairs,
according to the principles now in vogue; or whether he should
pursue the life of philosophy-and in what the latter way differs
from the former. But perhaps we had better first try to distinguish
them, as I did before, and when we have come to an agreement that they
are distinct, we may proceed to consider in what they differ from
one another, and which of them we should choose. Perhaps, however, you
do not even now understand what I mean?

  Cal. No, I do not.

  Soc. Then I will explain myself more clearly: seeing that you and
I have agreed that there is such a thing as good, and that there is
such a thing as pleasure, and that pleasure is not the same as good,
and that the pursuit and process of acquisition of the one, that is
pleasure, is different from the pursuit and process of acquisition
of the other, which is good-I wish that you would tell me whether
you agree with me thus far or not-do you agree?

  Cal. I do.

  Soc. Then I will proceed, and ask whether you also agree with me,
and whether you think that I spoke the truth when I further said to
Gorgias and Polus that cookery in my opinion is only an experience,
and not an art at all; and that whereas medicine is an art, and
attends to the nature and constitution of the patient, and has
principles of action and reason in each case, cookery in attending
upon pleasure never regards either the nature or reason of that
pleasure to which she devotes herself, but goes straight to her end,
nor ever considers or calculates anything, but works by experience and
routine, and just preserves the recollection of what she has usually
done when producing pleasure. And first, I would have you consider
whether I have proved what I was saying, and then whether there are
not other similar processes which have to do with the soul-some of
them processes of art, making a provision for the soul's highest
interest-others despising the interest, and, as in the previous
case, considering only the pleasure of the soul, and how this may be
acquired, but not considering what pleasures are good or bad, and
having no other aim but to afford gratification, whether good or
bad. In my opinion, Callicles, there are such processes, and this is
the sort of thing which I term flattery, whether concerned with the
body or the soul, or whenever employed with a view to pleasure and
without any consideration of good and evil. And now I wish that you
would tell me whether you agree with us in this notion, or whether you
differ.

  Cal. I do not differ; on the contrary, I agree; for in that way I
shall soonest bring the argument to an end, and shall oblige my friend
Gorgias.

  Soc. And is this notion true of one soul, or of two or more?

  Cal. Equally true of two or more.

  Soc. Then a man may delight a whole assembly, and yet have no regard
for their true interests?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Can you tell me the pursuits which delight mankind-or rather,
if you would prefer, let me ask, and do you answer, which of them
belong to the pleasurable class, and which of them not? In the first
place, what say you of flute-playing? Does not that appear to be an
art which seeks only pleasure, Callicles, and thinks of nothing else?

  Cal. I assent.

  Soc. And is not the same true of all similar arts, as, for
example, the art of playing the lyre at festivals?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And what do you say of the choral art and of dithyrambic
poetry?-are not they of the same nature? Do you imagine that
Cinesias the son of Meles cares about what will tend to the moral
improvement of his hearers, or about what will give pleasure to the
multitude?

  Cal. There can be no mistake about Cinesias, Socrates.

  Soc. And what do you say of his father, Meles the harp-player? Did
he perform with any view to the good of his hearers? Could he be
said to regard even their pleasure? For his singing was an
infliction to his audience. And of harp playing and dithyrambic poetry
in general, what would you say? Have they not been invented wholly for
the sake of pleasure?

  Cal. That is my notion of them.

  Soc. And as for the Muse of Tragedy, that solemn and august
personage-what are her aspirations? Is all her aim and desire only
to give pleasure to the spectators, or does she fight against them and
refuse to speak of their pleasant vices, and willingly proclaim in
word and song truths welcome and unwelcome?-which in your judgment
is her character?

  Cal. There can be no doubt, Socrates, that Tragedy has her face
turned towards pleasure and the gratification of the audience.

  Soc. And is not that the sort of thing, Callicles, which we were
just now describing as flattery?

  Cal. Quite true.

  Soc. Well now, suppose that we strip all poetry of song and rhythm
and metre, there will remain speech?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. And this speech is addressed to a crowd of people?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then, poetry is a sort of rhetoric?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. And do not the poets in the theatres seem to you to be
rhetoricians?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then now we have discovered a sort of rhetoric which is
addressed to a crowd of men, women, and children, freemen and
slaves. And this is not much to our taste, for we have described it as
having the nature of flattery.

  Cal. Quite true.

  Soc. Very good. And what do you say of that other rhetoric which
addresses the Athenian assembly and the assemblies of freemen in other
states? Do the rhetoricians appear to you always to aim at what is
best, and do they seek to improve the citizens by their speeches, or
are they too, like the rest of mankind, bent upon giving them
pleasure, forgetting the public good in the thought of their own
interest, playing with the people as with children, and trying to
amuse them, but never considering whether they are better or worse for
this?

  Cal. I must distinguish. There are some who have a real care of
the public in what they say, while others are such as you describe.

  Soc. I am contented with the admission that rhetoric is of two
sorts; one, which is mere flattery and disgraceful declamation; the
other, which is noble and aims at the training and improvement of
the souls of the citizens, and strives to say what is best, whether
welcome or unwelcome, to the audience; but have you ever known such
a rhetoric; or if you have, and can point out any rhetorician who is
of this stamp, who is he?

  Cal. But, indeed, I am afraid that I cannot tell you of any such
among the orators who are at present living.

  Soc. Well, then, can you mention any one of a former generation, who
may be said to have improved the Athenians, who found them worse and
made them better, from the day that he began to make speeches? for,
indeed, I do not know of such a man.

  Cal. What! did you never hear that Themistocles was a good man,
and Cimon and Miltiades and Pericles, who is just lately dead, and
whom you heard yourself?

  Soc. Yes, Callicles, they were good men, if, as you said at first,
true virtue consists only in the satisfaction of our own desires and
those of others; but if not, and if, as we were afterwards compelled
to acknowledge, the satisfaction of some desires makes us better,
and of others, worse, and we ought to gratify the one and not the
other, and there is an art in distinguishing them-can you tell me of
any of these statesmen who did distinguish them?

  Cal. No, indeed, I cannot.

  Soc. Yet, surely, Callicles, if you look you will find such a one.
Suppose that we just calmly consider whether any of these was such
as I have described. Will not the good man, who says whatever he
says with a view to the best, speak with a reference to some
standard and not at random; just as all other artists, whether the
painter, the builder, the shipwright, or any other look all of them to
their own work, and do not select and apply at random what they apply,
but strive to give a definite form to it? The artist disposes all
things in order, and compels the one part to harmonize and accord with
the other part, until he has constructed a regular and systematic
whole; and this is true of all artists, and in the same way the
trainers and physicians, of whom we spoke before, give order and
regularity to the body: do you deny this?

  Cal. No; I am ready to admit it.

  Soc. Then the house in which order and regularity prevail is good,
that in which there is disorder, evil?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And the same is true of a ship?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And the same may be said of the human body?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And what would you say of the soul? Will the good soul be
that in which disorder is prevalent, or that in which there is harmony
and order?

  Cal. The latter follows from our previous admissions.

  Soc. What is the name which is given to the effect of harmony and
order in the body?

  Cal. I suppose that you mean health and strength?

  Soc. Yes, I do; and what is the name which you would give to the
effect of harmony and order in the soul? Try and discover a name for
this as well as for the other.

  Cal. Why not give the name yourself, Socrates?

  Soc. Well, if you had rather that I should, I will; and you shall
say whether you agree with me, and if not, you shall refute and answer
me. "Healthy," as I conceive, is the name which is given to the
regular order of the body, whence comes health and every other
bodily excellence: is that true or not?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. And "lawful" and "law" are the names which are given to the
regular order and action of the soul, and these make men lawful and
orderly:-and so we have temperance and justice: have we not?

  Cal. Granted.

  Soc. And will not the true rhetorician who is honest and understands
his art have his eye fixed upon these, in all the words which he
addresses to the souls of men, and in all his actions, both in what he
gives and in what he takes away? Will not his aim be to implant
justice in the souls of his citizens mind take away injustice, to
implant temperance and take away intemperance, to implant every virtue
and take away every vice? Do you not agree?

  Cal. I agree.

  Soc. For what use is there, Callicles, in giving to the body of a
sick man who is in a bad state of health a quantity of the most
delightful food or drink or any other pleasant thing, which may be
really as bad for him as if you gave him nothing, or even worse if
rightly estimated. Is not that true?

  Cal. I will not say No to it.

  Soc. For in my opinion there is no profit in a man's life if his
body is in an evil plight-in that case his life also is evil: am I not
right?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. When a man is in health the physicians will generally allow him
to eat when he is hungry and drink when he is thirsty, and to
satisfy his desires as he likes, but when he is sick they hardly
suffer him to satisfy his desires at all: even you will admit that?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And does not the same argument hold of the soul, my good sir?
While she is in a bad state and is senseless and intemperate and
unjust and unholy, her desires ought to be controlled, and she ought
to be prevented from doing anything which does not tend to her own
improvement.

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Such treatment will be better for the soul herself?

  Cal. To be sure.

  Soc. And to restrain her from her appetites is to chastise her?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then restraint or chastisement is better for the soul than
intemperance or the-absence of control, which you were just now
preferring?

  Cal. I do not understand you, Socrates, and I wish that you would
ask some one who does.

  Soc. Here is a gentleman who cannot endure to be improved or: to
subject himself to that very chastisement of which the argument
speaks!

  Cal. I do not heed a word of what you are saying, and have only
answered hitherto out of civility to Gorgias.

  Soc. What are we to do, then? Shall we break off in the middle?

  Cal. You shall judge for yourself.

  Soc. Well, but people say that "a tale should have a head and not
break off in the middle," and I should not like to have the argument
going about without a head; please then to go on a little longer,
and put the head on.

  Cal. How tyrannical you are, Socrates! I wish that you and your
argument would rest, or that you would get some one else to argue with
you.

  Soc. But who else is willing?-I want to finish the argument.

  Cal. Cannot you finish without my help, either talking straight: on,
or questioning and answering yourself?

  Soc. Must I then say with Epicharmus, "Two men spoke before, but now
one shall be enough"? I suppose that there is absolutely no help.
And if I am to carry on the enquiry by myself, I will first of all
remark that not only, but all of us should have an ambition to know
what is true and what is false in this matter, for the discovery of
the truth is common good. And now I will proceed to argue according to
my own notion. But if any of you think that I arrive at conclusions
which are untrue you must interpose and refute me, for I do not
speak from any knowledge of what I am saying; I am an enquirer like
yourselves, and therefore, if my opponent says anything which is of
force, I shall be the first to agree with him. I am speaking on the
supposition that the argument ought to be completed; but if you
think otherwise let us leave off and go our ways.

  Gor. I think, Socrates, that we should not go our ways until you
have completed the argument; and this appears to me to be the wish
of the rest of the company; I myself should very much like to hear
what more you have to say.

  Soc. I too, Gorgias, should have liked to continue the argument with
Callicles, and then I might have given him an "Amphion" in return
for his "Zethus"; but since you, Callicles, are unwilling to continue,
I hope that you will listen, and interrupt me if I seem to you to be
in error. And if you refute me, I shall not be angry with you as you
are with me, but I shall inscribe you as the greatest of benefactors
on the tablets of my soul.

  Cal. My good fellow, never mind me, but get on.

  Soc. Listen to me, then, while I recapitulate the argument:-Is the
pleasant the same as the good? Not the same. Callicles and I are
agreed about that. And is the pleasant to be pursued for the sake of
the good? or the good for the sake of the pleasant? The pleasant is to
be pursued for the sake of the good. And that is pleasant at the
presence of which we are pleased, and that is good at the presence
of which we are good? To be sure. And we-good, and all good things
whatever are good when some virtue is present in us or them? That,
Callicles, is my conviction. But the virtue of each thing, whether
body or soul, instrument or creature, when given to them in the best
way comes to them not by chance but as the result of the order and
truth and art which are imparted to them: Am I not right? I maintain
that I am. And is not the virtue of each thing dependent on order or
arrangement? Yes, I say. And that which makes a thing good is the
proper order inhering in each thing? Such is my view. And is not the
soul which has an order of her own better than that which has no
order? Certainly. And the soul which has order is orderly? Of
course. And that which is orderly is temperate? Assuredly. And the
temperate soul is good? No other answer can I give, Callicles dear;
have you any?

  Cal. Go on, my good fellow.

  Soc. Then I shall proceed to add, that if the, temperate soul is the
good soul, the soul which is in the opposite condition, that is, the
foolish and intemperate, is the bad soul. Very true.

  And will not the temperate man do what is proper, both in relation
to the gods and to men; -for he would not be temperate if he did
not? Certainly he will do what is proper. In his relation to other men
he will do what is just; See and in his relation to the gods he will
do what is holy; and he who does what is just and holy must be just
and holy? Very true. And must he not be courageous? for the duty of
a temperate man is not to follow or to avoid what he ought not, but
what he ought, whether things or men or pleasures or pains, and
patiently to endure when he ought; and therefore, Callicles, the
temperate man, being, as we have described, also just and courageous
and holy, cannot be other than a perfectly good man, nor can the
good man do otherwise than well and perfectly whatever he does; and he
who does well must of necessity be happy and blessed, and the evil man
who does evil, miserable: now this latter is he whom you were
applauding-the intemperate who is the opposite of the temperate.
Such is my position, and these things I affirm to be true. And if they
are true, then I further affirm that he who desires to be happy must
pursue and practise temperance and run away from intemperance as
fast as his legs will carry him: he had better order his life so as
not to need punishment; but if either he or any of his friends,
whether private individual or city, are in need of punishment, then
justice must be done and he must suffer punishment, if he would be
happy. This appears to me to be the aim which a man ought to have, and
towards which he ought to direct all the energies both of himself
and of the state, acting so that he may have temperance and justice
present with him and be happy, not suffering his lusts to be
unrestrained, and in the never-ending desire satisfy them leading a
robber's life. Such; one is the friend neither of God nor man, for
he is incapable of communion, and he who is incapable of communion
is also incapable of friendship. And philosophers tell us,
Callicles, that communion and friendship and orderliness and
temperance and justice bind together heaven and earth and gods and
men, and that this universe is therefore called Cosmos or order, not
disorder or misrule, my friend. But although you are a philosopher you
seem to me never to have observed that geometrical equality is mighty,
both among gods and men; you think that you ought to cultivate
inequality or excess, and do not care about geometry.-Well, then,
either the principle that the happy are made happy by the possession
of justice and temperance, and the miserable the possession of vice,
must be refuted, or, if it is granted, what will be the
consequences? All the consequences which I drew before, Callicles, and
about which you asked me whether I was in earnest when I said that a
man ought to accuse himself and his son and his friend if he did
anything wrong, and that to this end he should use his rhetoric-all
those consequences are true. And that which you thought that Polus was
led to admit out of modesty is true, viz., that, to do injustice, if
more disgraceful than to suffer, is in that degree worse; and the
other position, which, according to Polus, Gorgias admitted out of
modesty, that he who would truly be a rhetorician ought to be just and
have a knowledge of justice, has also turned out to be true.

  And now, these things being as we have said, let us proceed in the
next place to consider whether you are right in throwing in my teeth
that I am unable to help myself or any of my friends or kinsmen, or to
save them in the extremity of danger, and that I am in the power of
another like an outlaw to whom anyone may do what he likes-he may
box my ears, which was a brave saying of yours; or take away my
goods or banish me, or even do his worst and kill me; a condition
which, as you say, is the height of disgrace. My answer to you is
one which has been already often repeated, but may as well be repeated
once more. I tell you, Callicles, that to be boxed on the ears
wrongfully is not the worst evil which can befall a man, nor to have
my purse or my body cut open, but that to smite and slay me and mine
wrongfully is far more disgraceful and more evil; aye, and to
despoil and enslave and pillage, or in any way at all to wrong me
and mine, is far more disgraceful and evil to the doer of the wrong
than to me who am the sufferer. These truths, which have been
already set forth as I state them in the previous discussion, would
seem now to have been fixed and riveted by us, if I may use an
expression which is certainly bold, in words which are like bonds of
iron and adamant; and unless you or some other still more enterprising
hero shall break them, there is no possibility of denying what I
say. For my position has always been, that I myself am ignorant how
these things are, but that I have never met any one who could say
otherwise, any more than you can, and not appear ridiculous. This is
my position still, and if what I am saying is true, and injustice is
the greatest of evils to the doer of injustice, and yet there is if
possible a greater than this greatest of evils, in an unjust man not
suffering retribution, what is that defence of which the want will
make a man truly ridiculous? Must not the defence be one which will
avert the greatest of human evils? And will not worst of all
defences be that with which a man is unable to defend himself or his
family or his friends?-and next will come that which is unable to
avert the next greatest evil; thirdly that which is unable to avert
the third greatest evil; and so of other evils. As is the greatness of
evil so is the honour of being able to avert them in their several
degrees, and the disgrace of not being able to avert them. Am I not
right Callicles?

  Cal. Yes, quite right.

  Soc. Seeing then that there are these two evils, the doing injustice
and the suffering injustice-and we affirm that to do injustice is a
greater, and to suffer injustice a lesser evil-by what devices can a
man succeed in obtaining the two advantages, the one of not doing
and the other of not suffering injustice? must he have the power, or
only the will to obtain them? I mean to ask whether a man will
escape injustice if he has only the will to escape, or must he have
provided himself with the power?

  Cal. He must have provided himself with the power; that is clear.

  Soc. And what do you say of doing injustice? Is the will only
sufficient, and will that prevent him from doing injustice, or must he
have provided himself with power and art; and if he has not studied
and practised, will he be unjust still? Surely you might say,
Callicles, whether you think that Polus and I were right in
admitting the conclusion that no one does wrong voluntarily, but
that all do wrong against their will?

  Cal. Granted, Socrates, if you will only have done.

  Soc. Then, as would appear, power and art have to be provided in
order that we may do no injustice?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. And what art will protect us from suffering injustice, if not
wholly, yet as far as possible? I want to know whether you agree
with me; for I think that such an art is the art of one who is
either a ruler or even tyrant himself, or the equal and companion of
the ruling power.

  Cal. Well said, Socrates; and please to observe how ready I am to
praise you when you talk sense.

  Soc. Think and tell me whether you would approve of another view
of mine: To me every man appears to be most the friend of him who is
most like to him-like to like, as ancient sages say: Would you not
agree to this?

  Cal. I should.

  Soc. But when the tyrant is rude and uneducated, he may be
expected to fear any one who is his superior in virtue, and will never
be able to be perfectly friendly with him.

  Cal. That is true.

  Soc. Neither will he be the friend of any one who greatly his
inferior, for the tyrant will despise him, and will never seriously
regard him as a friend.

  Cal. That again is true.

  Soc. Then the only friend worth mentioning, whom the tyrant can
have, will be one who is of the same character, and has the same likes
and dislikes, and is at the same time willing to be subject and
subservient to him; he is the man who will have power in the state,
and no one will injure him with impunity:-is not that so?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And if a young man begins to ask how he may become great and
formidable, this would seem to be the way-he will accustom himself,
from his youth upward, to feel sorrow and joy on, the same occasions
as his master, and will contrive to be as like him as possible?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And in this way he will have accomplished, as you and your
friends would. say, the end of becoming a great man and not
suffering injury?

  Cal. Very true.

  Soc. But will he also escape from doing injury? Must not the very
opposite be true,-if he is to be like the tyrant in his injustice, and
to have influence with him? Will he not rather contrive to do as
much wrong as possible, and not be punished?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. And by the imitation of his master and by the power which he
thus acquires will not his soul become bad and corrupted, and will not
this be the greatest evil to him?

  Cal. You always contrive somehow or other, Socrates, to invert
everything: do you not know that he who imitates the tyrant will, if
he has a mind, kill him who does not imitate him and take away his
goods?

  Soc. Excellent Callicles, I am not deaf, and I have heard that a
great many times from you and from Polus and from nearly every man
in the city, but I wish that you would hear me too. I dare say that he
will kill him if he has a mind-the bad man will kill the good and
true.

  Cal. And is not that just the provoking thing?

  Soc. Nay, not to a man of sense, as the argument shows: do you think
that all our cares should be directed to prolonging life to the
uttermost, and to the study of those arts which secure us from
danger always; like that art of rhetoric which saves men in courts
of law, and which you advise me to cultivate?

  Cal. Yes, truly, and very good advice too.

  Soc. Well, my friend, but what do you think of swimming; is that
an art of any great pretensions?

  Cal. No, indeed.

  Soc. And yet surely swimming saves a man from death, there are
occasions on which he must know how to swim. And if you despise the
swimmers, I will tell you of another and greater art, the art of the
pilot, who not only saves the souls of men, but also their bodies
and properties from the extremity of danger, just like rhetoric. Yet
his art is modest and unpresuming: it has no airs or pretences of
doing anything extraordinary, and, in return for the same salvation
which is given by the pleader, demands only two obols, if he brings us
from Aegina to Athens, or for the longer voyage from Pontus or
Egypt, at the utmost two drachmae, when he has saved, as I was just
now saying, the passenger and his wife and children and goods, and
safely disembarked them at the Piraeus -this is the payment which he
asks in return for so great a boon; and he who is the master of the
art, and has done all this, gets out and walks about on the
sea-shore by his ship in an unassuming way. For he is able to
reflect and is aware that he cannot tell which of his
fellow-passengers he has benefited, and which of them he has injured
in not allowing them to be drowned. He knows that they are just the
same when he has disembarked them as when they embarked, and not a
whit better either in their bodies or in their souls; and he considers
that if a man who is afflicted by great and incurable bodily
diseases is only to be pitied for having escaped, and is in no way
benefited by him in having been saved from drowning, much less he
who has great and incurable diseases, not of the body, but of the
soul, which is the more valuable part of him; neither is life worth
having nor of any profit to the bad man, whether he be delivered
from the sea, or the law-courts, or any other devourer-and so he
reflects that such a one had better not live, for he cannot live well.

  And this is the reason why the pilot, although he is our saviour, is
not usually conceited, any more than the engineer, who is not at all
behind either the general, or the pilot, or any one else, in his
saving power, for he sometimes saves whole cities. Is there any
comparison between him and the pleader? And if he were to talk,
Callicles, in your grandiose style, he would bury you under a mountain
of words, declaring and insisting that we ought all of us to be
engine-makers, and that no other profession is worth thinking about;
he would have plenty to say. Nevertheless you despise him and his art,
and sneeringly call him an engine-maker, and you will not allow your
daughters to marry his son, or marry your son to his daughters. And
yet, on your principle, what justice or reason is there in your
refusal? What right have you to despise the engine-maker, and the
others whom I was just now mentioning? I know that you will say, "I am
better, better born." But if the better is not what I say, and
virtue consists only in a man saving himself and his, whatever may
be his character, then your censure of the engine-maker, and of the
physician, and of the other arts of salvation, is ridiculous. O my
friend! I want you to see that the noble and the good may possibly
be something different from saving and being saved:-May not he who
is truly a man cease to care about living a certain time?-he knows, as
women say, that no man can escape fate, and therefore he is not fond
of life; he leaves all that with God, and considers in what way he can
best spend his appointed term-whether by assimilating himself to the
constitution under which he lives, as you at this moment have to
consider how you may become as like as possible to the Athenian
people, if you mean to be in their good graces, and to have power in
the state; whereas I want you to think and see whether this is for the
interest of either of us-I would not have us risk that which is
dearest on the acquisition of this power, like the Thessalian
enchantresses, who, as they say, bring down the moon from heaven at
the risk of their own perdition. But if you suppose that any man
will show you the art of becoming great in the city, and yet not
conforming yourself to the ways of the city, whether for better or
worse, then I can only say that you are mistaken, Callides; for he who
would deserve to be the true natural friend of the Athenian Demus,
aye, or of Pyrilampes' darling who is called after them, must be by
nature like them, and not an imitator only. He, then, who will make
you most like them, will make you as you desire, a statesman and
orator: for every man is pleased when he is spoken to in his own
language and spirit, and dislikes any other. But perhaps you, sweet
Callicles, may be of another mind. What do you say?

  Cal. Somehow or other your words, Socrates, always appear to me to
be good words; and yet, like the rest of the world, I am not quite
convinced by them.

  Soc. The reason is, Callicles, that the love of Demus which abides
in your soul is an adversary to me; but I dare say that if we recur to
these same matters, and consider them more thoroughly, you may be
convinced for all that. Please, then, to remember that there are two
processes of training all things, including body and soul; in the one,
as we said, we treat them with a view to pleasure, and in the other
with a view to the highest good, and then we do not indulge but resist
them: was not that the distinction which we drew?

  Cal. Very true.

  Soc. And the one which had pleasure in view was just a vulgar
flattery:-was not that another of our conclusions?

  Cal. Be it so, if you will have it.

  Soc. And the other had in view the greatest improvement of that
which was ministered to, whether body or soul?

  Cal. Quite true.

  Soc. And must we not have the same end in view in the treatment of
our city and citizens? Must we not try and make-them as good as
possible? For we have already discovered that there is no use in
imparting to them any other good, unless the mind of those who are
to have the good, whether money, or office, or any other sort of
power, be gentle and good. Shall we say that?

  Cal. Yes, certainly, if you like.

  Soc. Well, then, if you and I, Callicles, were intending to set
about some public business, and were advising one another to undertake
buildings, such as walls, docks or temples of the largest size,
ought we not to examine ourselves, first, as to whether we know or
do not know the art of building, and who taught us?-would not that
be necessary, Callicles?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. In the second place, we should have to consider whether we
had ever constructed any private house, either of our own or for our
friends, and whether this building of ours was a success or not; and
if upon consideration we found that we had had good and eminent
masters, and had been successful in constructing many fine
buildings, not only with their assistance, but without them, by our
own unaided skill-in that case prudence would not dissuade us from
proceeding to the construction of public works. But if we had no
master to show, and only a number of worthless buildings or none at
all, then, surely, it would be ridiculous in us to attempt public
works, or to advise one another to undertake them. Is not this true?

  Cal. Certainly.

  Soc. And does not the same hold in all other cases? If you and I
were physicians, and were advising one another that we were
competent to practise as state-physicians, should I not ask about you,
and would you not ask about me, Well, but how about Socrates
himself, has he good health? and was any one else ever known to be
cured by him, whether slave or freeman? And I should make the same
enquiries about you. And if we arrived at the conclusion that no
one, whether citizen or stranger, man or woman, had ever been any
the better for the medical skill of either of us, then, by Heaven,
Callicles, what an absurdity to think that we or any human being
should be so silly as to set up as state-physicians and advise
others like ourselves to do the same, without having first practised
in private, whether successfully or not, and acquired experience of
the art! Is not this, as they say, to begin with the big jar when
you are learning the potter's art; which is a foolish thing?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. And now, my friend, as you are already beginning to be a public
character, and are admonishing and reproaching me for not being one,
suppose that we ask a few questions of one another. Tell me, then,
Callicles, how about making any of the citizens better? Was there ever
a man who was once vicious, or unjust, or intemperate, or foolish, and
became by the help of Callicles good and noble? Was there ever such
a man, whether citizen or stranger, slave or freeman? Tell me,
Callicles, if a person were to ask these questions of you, what
would you answer? Whom would you say that-you had improved by your
conversation? There may have been good deeds of this sort which were
done by you as a private person, before you came forward in public.
Why will you not answer?

  Cal. You are contentious, Socrates.

  Soc. Nay, I ask you, not from a love of contention, but because I
really want to know in what way you think that affairs should be
administered among us-whether, when you come to the administration
of them, you have any other aim but the improvement of the citizens?
Have we not already admitted many times over that such is the duty
of a public man? Nay, we have surely said so; for if you will not
answer for yourself I must answer for you. But if this is what the
good man ought to effect for the benefit of his own state, allow me to
recall to you the names of those whom you were just now mentioning,
Pericles, and Cimon, and Miltiades, and Themistocles, and ask
whether you still think that they were good citizens.

  Cal. I do.

  Soc. But if they were good, then clearly each of them must have made
the citizens better instead of worse?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And, therefore, when Pericles first began to speak in the
assembly, the Athenians were not so good as when he spoke last?

  Cal. Very likely.

  Soc. Nay, my friend, "likely" is not the word; for if he was a
good citizen, the inference is certain.

  Cal. And what difference does that make?

  Soc. None; only I should like further to know whether the
Athenians are supposed to have been made better by Pericles, or, on
the contrary, to have been corrupted by him; for I hear that he was
the first who gave the people pay, and made them idle and cowardly,
and encouraged them in the love of talk and money.

  Cal. You heard that, Socrates, from the laconising set who bruise
their ears.

  Soc. But what I am going to tell you now is not mere hearsay, but
well known both to you and me: that at first, Pericles was glorious
and his character unimpeached by any verdict of the Athenians-this was
during the time when they were not so good-yet afterwards, when they
had been made good and gentle by him, at the very end of his life they
convicted him of theft, and almost put him to death, clearly under the
notion that he was a malefactor.

  Cal. Well, but how does that prove Pericles' badness?

  Soc. Why, surely you would say that he was a bad manager of asses or
horses or oxen, who had received them originally neither kicking nor
butting nor biting him, and implanted in them all these savage tricks?
Would he not be a bad manager of any animals who received them gentle,
and made them fiercer than they were when he received them? What do
you say?

  Cal. I will do you the favour of saying "yes."

  Soc. And will you also do me the favour of saying whether man is
an animal?

  Cal. Certainly he is.

  Soc. And was not Pericles a shepherd of men?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. And if he was a good political shepherd, ought not the
animals who were his subjects, as we were just now acknowledging, to
have become more just, and not more unjust?

  Cal. Quite true.

  Soc. And are not just men gentle, as Homer says?-or are you of
another mind?

  Cal. I agree.

  Soc. And yet he really did make them more savage than he received
them, and their savageness was shown towards himself; which he must
have been very far from desiring.

  Cal. Do you want me to agree with you?

  Soc. Yes, if I seem to you to speak the truth.

  Cal. Granted then.

  Soc. And if they were more savage, must they not have been more
unjust and inferior?

  Cal. Granted again.

  Soc. Then upon this view, Pericles was not a good statesman?

  Cal. That is, upon your view.

  Soc. Nay, the view is yours, after what you have admitted. Take
the case of Cimon again. Did not the very persons whom he was
serving ostracize him, in order that they might not hear his voice for
ten years? and they did just the same to Themistocles, adding the
penalty of exile; and they voted that Miltiades, the hero of Marathon,
should be thrown into the pit of death, and he was only saved by the
Prytanis. And yet, if they had been really good men, as you say, these
things would never have happened to them. For the good charioteers are
not those who at first keep their place, and then, when they have
broken-in their horses, and themselves become better charioteers,
are thrown out-that is not the way either in charioteering or in any
profession-What do you think?

  Cal. I should think not.

  Soc. Well, but if so, the truth is as I have said already, that in
the Athenian State no one has ever shown himself to be a good
statesman-you admitted that this was true of our present statesmen,
but not true of former ones, and you preferred them to the others; yet
they have turned out to be no better than our present ones; and
therefore, if they were rhetoricians, they did not use the true art of
rhetoric or of flattery, or they would not have fallen out of favour.

  Cal. But surely, Socrates, no living man ever came near any one of
them in his performances.

  Soc. O, my dear friend, I say nothing against them regarded as the
serving-men of the State; and I do think that they were certainly more
serviceable than those who are living now, and better able to
gratify the wishes of the State; but as to transforming those
desires and not allowing them to have their way, and using the
powers which they had, whether of persuasion or of force, in the
improvement of their fellow citizens, which is the prime object of the
truly good citizen, I do not see that in these respects they were a
whit superior to our present statesmen, although I do admit that
they were more clever at providing ships and walls and docks, and
all that. You and I have a ridiculous way, for during the whole time
that we are arguing, we are always going round and round to the same
point, and constantly misunderstanding one another. If I am not
mistaken, you have admitted and acknowledged more than once, that
there are two kinds of operations which have to do with the body,
and two which have to do with the soul: one of the two is ministerial,
and if our bodies are hungry provides food for them, and if they are
thirsty gives them drink, or if they are cold supplies them with
garments, blankets, shoes, and all that they crave. I use the same
images as before intentionally, in order that you may understand me
the better. The purveyor of the articles may provide them either
wholesale or retail, or he may be the maker of any of them,-the baker,
or the cook, or the weaver, or the shoemaker, or the currier; and in
so doing, being such as he is, he is naturally supposed by himself and
every one to minister to the body. For none of them know that there is
another art-an art of gymnastic and medicine which is the true
minister of the body, and ought to be the mistress of all the rest,
and to use their results according to the knowledge which she has
and they have not, of the real good or bad effects of meats and drinks
on the body. All other arts which have to do with the body are servile
and menial and illiberal; and gymnastic and medicine are, as they
ought to be, their mistresses.

  Now, when I say that all this is equally true of the soul, you
seem at first to know and understand and assent to my words, and
then a little while afterwards you come repeating, Has not the State
had good and noble citizens? and when I ask you who they are, you
reply, seemingly quite in earnest as if I had asked, Who are or have
been good trainers?-and you had replied, Thearion, the baker,
Mithoecus, who wrote the Sicilian cookery-book, Sarambus, the vintner:
these are ministers of the body, first-rate in their art; for the
first makes admirable loaves, the second excellent dishes, and the
third capital wine-to me these appear to be the exact parallel of
the statesmen whom you mention. Now you would not be altogether
pleased if I said to you, My friend, you know nothing of gymnastics;
those of whom you are speaking to me are only the ministers and
purveyors of luxury, who have no good or noble notions of their art,
and may very likely be filling and fattening men's bodies and
gaining their approval, although the result is that they lose their
original flesh in the long run, and become thinner than they were
before; and yet they, in their simplicity, will not attribute their
diseases and loss of flesh to their entertainers; but when in after
years the unhealthy surfeit brings the attendant penalty of disease,
he who happens to be near them at the time, and offers them advice, is
accused and blamed by them, and if they could they would do him some
harm; while they proceed to eulogize the men who have been the real
authors of the mischief.

  And that, Callicles, is just what you are now doing. You praise
the men who feasted the citizens and satisfied their desires, and
people say that they have made the city great, not seeing that the
swollen And ulcerated condition of the State is to be attributed to
these elder statesmen; for they have filled the city full of
harbours and docks and walls and revenues and all that, and have
left no room for justice and temperance. And when the crisis of the
disorder comes, the people will blame the advisers of the hour, and
applaud Themistocles and Cimon and Pericles, who are the real
authors of their calamities; and if you are not careful they may
assail you and my friend Alcibiades, when they are losing not only
their new acquisitions, but also their original possessions; not
that you are the authors of these misfortunes of theirs, although
you may perhaps be accessories to them. A great piece of work is
always being made, as I see and am told, now as of old; about our
statesmen. When the State treats any of them as malefactors, I observe
that there is a great uproar and indignation at the supposed wrong
which is done to them; "after all their many services to the State,
that they should unjustly perish"-so the tale runs. But the cry is all
a lie; for no statesman ever could be unjustly put to death by the
city of which he is the head. The case of the professed statesman
is, I believe, very much like that of the professed sophist; for the
sophists, although they are wise men, are nevertheless guilty of a
strange piece of folly; professing to be teachers of virtue, they will
often accuse their disciples of wronging them, and defrauding them
of their pay, and showing no gratitude for their services. Yet what
can be more absurd than that men who have become just and good, and
whose injustice has been taken away from them, and who have had
justice implanted in them by their teachers, should act unjustly by
reason of the injustice which is not in them? Can anything be more
irrational, my friends, than this? You, Callicles, compel me to be a
mob-orator, because you will not answer.

   Cal. And you are the man who cannot speak unless there is some
one to answer?

  Soc. I suppose that I can; just now, at any rate, the speeches which
I am making are long enough because you refuse to answer me. But I
adjure you by the god of friendship, my good sir, do tell me whether
there does not appear to you to be a great inconsistency in saying
that you have made a man good, and then blaming him for being bad?

  Cal. Yes, it appears so to me.

  Soc. Do you never hear our professors of education speaking in
this inconsistent manner?

  Cal. Yes, but why talk of men who are good for nothing?

  Soc. I would rather say, why talk of men who profess to be rulers,
and declare that they are devoted to the improvement of the city,
and nevertheless upon occasion declaim against the utter vileness of
the city:-do you think that there is any difference between one and
the other? My good friend, the sophist and the rhetorician, as I was
saying to Polus, are the same, or nearly the same; but you
ignorantly fancy that rhetoric is a perfect thing, sophistry a thing
to be despised; whereas the truth is, that sophistry is as much
superior to rhetoric as legislation is to the practice of law, or
gymnastic to medicine. The orators and sophists, as I am inclined to
think, are the only class who cannot complain of the mischief
ensuing to themselves from that which they teach others, without in
the same breath accusing themselves of having done no good to those
whom they profess to benefit. Is not this a fact?

  Cal. Certainly it is.

  Soc. If they were right in saying that they make men better, then
they are the only class who can afford to leave their remuneration
to those who have been benefited by them. Whereas if a man has been
benefited in any other way, if, for example, he has been taught to run
by a trainer, he might possibly defraud him of his pay, if the trainer
left the matter to him, and made no agreement with him that he
should receive money as soon as he had given him the utmost speed; for
not because of any deficiency of speed do men act unjustly, but by
reason of injustice.

  Cal. Very true.

  Soc. And he who removes injustice can be in no danger of being
treated unjustly: he alone can safely leave the honorarium to his
pupils, if he be really able to make them good-am I not right?

  Cal. Yes.

  Soc. Then we have found the reason why there is no dishonour in a
man receiving pay who is called in to advise about building or any
other art?

  Cal. Yes, we have found the reason.

  Soc. But when the point is, how a man may become best himself, and
best govern his family and state, then to say that you will give no
advice gratis is held to be dishonourable?

  Cal. True.

  Soc. And why? Because only such benefits call forth a desire to
requite them, and there is evidence that a benefit has been
conferred when the benefactor receives a return; otherwise not. Is
this true?

  Cal. It is.

  Soc. Then to which service of the State do you invite me?
determine for me. Am I to be the physician of the State who will
strive and struggle to make the Athenians as good as possible; or am I
to be the servant and flatterer of the State? Speak out, my good
friend, freely and fairly as you did at first and ought to do again,
and tell me your entire mind.

  Cal. I say then that you should be the servant of the State.

  Soc. The flatterer? well, sir, that is a noble invitation.

  Cal. The Mysian, Socrates, or what you please. For if you refuse,
the consequences will be-

  Soc. Do not repeat the old story-that he who likes will kill me
and get my money; for then I shall have to repeat the old answer, that
he will be a bad man and will kill the good, and that the money will
be of no use to him, but that he will wrongly use that which he
wrongly took, and if wrongly, basely, and if basely, hurtfully.

  Cal. How confident you are, Socrates, that you will never come to
harm! you seem to think that you are living in another country, and
can never be brought into a court of justice, as you very likely may
be brought by some miserable and mean person.

  Soc. Then I must indeed be a fool, Callicles, if I do not know
that in the Athenian State any man may suffer anything. And if I am
brought to trial and incur the dangers of which you speak, he will
be a villain who brings me to trial-of that I am very sure, for no
good man would accuse the innocent. Nor shall I be surprised if I am
put to death. Shall I tell you why I anticipate this?

  Cal. By all means.

  Soc. I think that I am the only or almost the only Athenian living
who practises the true art of politics; I am the only politician of my
time. Now, seeing that when I speak my words are not uttered with
any view of gaining favour, and that I look to what is best and not to
what is most pleasant, having no mind to use those arts and graces
which you recommend, I shall have nothing to say in the justice court.
And you might argue with me, as I was arguing with Polus: -I shall
be tried just as a physician would be tried in a court of little
boys at the indictment of the cook. What Would he reply under such
circumstances, if some one were to accuse him, saying, "O my boys,
many evil things has this man done to you: he is the death of you,
especially of the younger ones among you, cutting and burning and
starving and suffocating you, until you know not what to do; he
gives you the bitterest potions, and compels you to hunger and thirst.
How unlike the variety of meats and sweets on which I feasted you!"
What do you suppose that the physician would be able to reply when
he found himself in such a predicament? If he told the truth he
could only say, "All these evil things, my boys, I did for your
health," and then would there not just be a clamour among a jury
like that? How they would cry out!

  Cal. I dare say.

  Soc. Would he not be utterly at a loss for a reply?

  Cal. He certainly would.

  Soc. And I too shall be treated in the same way, as I well know,
if I am brought before the court. For I shall not be able to
rehearse to the people the pleasures which I have procured for them,
and which, although I am not disposed to envy either the procurers
or enjoyers of them, are deemed by them to be benefits and advantages.
And if any one says that I corrupt young men, and perplex their minds,
or that I speak evil of old men, and use bitter words towards them,
whether in private or public, it is useless for me to reply, as I
truly might:-"All this I do for the sake of justice, and with a view
to your interest, my judges, and to nothing else." And therefore there
is no saying what may happen to me.

  Cal. And do you think, Socrates, that a man who is thus
defenceless is in a good position?

  Soc. Yes, Callicles, if he have that defence, which as you have
often acknowledged he should have-if he be his own defence, and have
never said or done anything wrong, either in respect of gods or men;
and this has been repeatedly acknowledged by us to be the best sort of
defence. And if anyone could convict me of inability to defend
myself or others after this sort, I should blush for shame, whether
I was convicted before many, or before a few, or by myself alone;
and if I died from want of ability to do so, that would indeed
grieve me. But if I died because I have no powers of flattery or
rhetoric, I am very sure that you would not find me repining at death.
For no man who is not an utter fool and coward is afraid of death
itself, but he is afraid of doing wrong. For to go to the world
below having one's soul full of injustice is the last and worst of all
evils. And in proof of what I say, if you have no objection, I
should like to tell you a story.

  Cal. Very well, proceed; and then we shall have done.

  Soc. Listen, then, as story-tellers say, to a very pretty tale,
which I dare say that you may be disposed to regard as a fable only,
but which, as I believe, is a true tale, for I mean to speak the
truth. Homer tells us, how Zeus and Poseidon and Pluto divided the
empire which they inherited from their father. Now in the days of
Cronos there existed a law respecting the destiny of man, which has
always been, and still continues to be in Heaven-that he who has lived
all his life in justice and holiness shall go, when he is dead, to the
Islands of the Blessed, and dwell there in perfect happiness out of
the reach of evil; but that he who has lived unjustly and impiously
shall go to the house of vengeance and punishment, which is called
Tartarus. And in the time of Cronos, and even quite lately in the
reign of Zeus, the judgment was given on the very day on which the men
were to die; the judges were alive, and the men were alive; and the
consequence was that the judgments were not well given. Then Pluto and
the authorities from the Islands of the Blessed came to Zeus, and said
that the souls found their way to the wrong places. Zeus said: "I
shall put a stop to this; the judgments are not well given, because
the persons who are judged have their clothes on, for they are
alive; and there are many who, having evil souls, are apparelled in
fair bodies, or encased in wealth or rank, and, when the day of
judgment arrives, numerous witnesses come forward and testify on their
behalf that they have lived righteously. The judges are awed by
them, and they themselves too have their clothes on when judging;
their eyes and ears and their whole bodies are interposed as a well
before their own souls. All this is a hindrance to them; there are the
clothes of the judges and the clothes of the judged-What is to be
done? I will tell you:-In the first place, I will deprive men of the
foreknowledge of death, which they possess at present: this power
which they have Prometheus has already received my orders to take from
them: in the second place, they shall be entirely stripped before they
are judged, for they shall be judged when they are dead; and the judge
too shall be naked, that is to say, dead-he with his naked soul
shall pierce into the other naked souls; and they shall die suddenly
and be deprived of all their kindred, and leave their brave attire
strewn upon the earth-conducted in this manner, the judgment will be
just. I knew all about the matter before any of you, and therefore I
have made my sons judges; two from Asia, Minos and Rhadamanthus, and
one from Europe, Aeacus. And these, when they are dead, shall give
judgment in the meadow at the parting of the ways, whence the two
roads lead, one to the Islands of the Blessed, and the other to
Tartarus. Rhadamanthus shall judge those who come from Asia, and
Aeacus those who come from Europe. And to Minos I shall give the
primacy, and he shall hold a court of appeal, in case either of the
two others are in any doubt:-then the judgment respecting the last
journey of men will be as just as possible."

  From this tale, Callicles, which I have heard and believe, I draw
the following inferences:-Death, if I am right, is in the first
place the separation from one another of two things, soul and body;
nothing else. And after they are separated they retain their several
natures, as in life; the body keeps the same habit, and the results of
treatment or accident are distinctly visible in it: for example, he
who by nature or training or both, was a tall man while he was
alive, will remain as he was, after he is dead; and the fat man will
remain fat; and so on; and the dead man, who in life had a fancy to
have flowing hair, will have flowing hair. And if he was marked with
the whip and had the prints of the scourge, or of wounds in him when
he was alive, you might see the same in the dead body; and if his
limbs were broken or misshapen when he was alive, the same
appearance would be visible in the dead. And in a word, whatever was
the habit of the body during life would be distinguishable after
death, either perfectly, or in a great measure and for a certain time.
And I should imagine that this is equally true of the soul, Callicles;
when a man is stripped of the body, all the natural or acquired
affections of the soul are laid open to view. And when they come to
the judge, as those from Asia come to Rhadamanthus, he places them
near him and inspects them quite impartially, not knowing whose the
soul is: perhaps he may lay hands on the soul of the great king, or of
some other king or potentate, who has no soundness in him, but his
soul is marked with the whip, and is full of the prints and scars of
perjuries and crimes with which each action has stained him, and he is
all crooked with falsehood and imposture, and has no straightness,
because he has lived without truth. Him Rhadamanthus beholds, full
of all deformity and disproportion, which is caused by licence and
luxury and insolence and incontinence, and despatches him
ignominiously to his prison, and there he undergoes the punishment
which he deserves.

  Now the proper office of punishment is twofold: he who is rightly
punished ought either to become better and profit by it, or he ought
to be made an example to his fellows, that they may see what he
suffers, and fear and become better. Those who are improved when
they are punished by gods and men, are those whose sins are curable;
and they are improved, as in this world so also in another, by pain
and suffering; for there is no other way in which they can be
delivered from their evil. But they who have been guilty of the
worst crimes, and are incurable by reason of their crimes, are made
examples; for, as they are incurable, the time has passed at which
they can receive any benefit. They get no good themselves, but
others get good when they behold them enduring for ever the most
terrible and painful and fearful sufferings as the penalty of their
sins-there they are, hanging up as examples, in the prison-house of
the world below, a spectacle and a warning to all unrighteous men
who come thither. And among them, as I confidently affirm, will be
found Archelaus, if Polus truly reports of him, and any other tyrant
who is like him. Of these fearful examples, most, as I believe, are
taken from the class of tyrants and kings and potentates and public
men, for they are the authors of the greatest and most impious crimes,
because they have the power. And Homer witnesses to the truth of this;
for they are always kings and potentates whom he has described as
suffering everlasting punishment in the world below: such were
Tantalus and Sisyphus and Tityus. But no one ever described Thersites,
or any private person who was a villain, as suffering everlasting
punishment, or as incurable. For to commit the worst crimes, as I am
inclined to think, was not in his power, and he was happier than those
who had the power. No, Callicles, the very bad men come from the class
of those who have power. And yet in that very class there may arise
good men, and worthy of all admiration they are, for where there is
great power to do wrong, to live and to die justly is a hard thing,
and greatly to be praised, and few there are who attain to this.
Such good and true men, however, there have been, and will be again,
at Athens and in other states, who have fulfilled their trust
righteously; and there is one who is quite famous all over Hellas,
Aristeides, the son of Lysimachus. But, in general, great men are also
bad, my friend.

  As I was saying, Rhadamanthus, when he gets a soul of the bad
kind, knows nothing about him, neither who he is, nor who his
parents are; he knows only that he has got hold of a villain; and
seeing this, he stamps him as curable or incurable, and sends him away
to Tartarus, whither he goes and receives his proper recompense. Or,
again, he looks with admiration on the soul of some just one who has
lived in holiness and truth; he may have been a private man or not;
and I should say, Callicles, that he is most likely to have been a
philosopher who has done his own work, and not troubled himself with
the doings of other in his lifetime; him Rhadamanthus sends to the
Islands of the Blessed. Aeacus does the same; and they both have
sceptres, and judge; but Minos alone has a golden sceptre and is
seated looking on, as Odysseus in Homer declares that he saw him:

    Holding a sceptre of gold, and giving laws to the dead.

Now I, Callicles, am persuaded of the truth of these things, and I
consider how I shall present my soul whole and undefiled before the
judge in that day. Renouncing the honours at which the world aims, I
desire only to know the truth, and to live as well as I can, and, when
I die, to die as well as I can. And, to the utmost of my power, I
exhort all other men to do the same. And, in return for your
exhortation of me, I exhort you also to take part in the great combat,
which is the combat of life, and greater than every other earthly
conflict. And I retort your reproach of me, and say, that you will not
be able to help yourself when the day of trial and judgment, of
which I was speaking, comes upon you; you will go before the judge,
the son of Aegina, and, when he has got you in his grip and is
carrying you off, you will gape and your head will swim round, just as
mine would in the courts of this world, and very likely some one
will shamefully box you on the ears, and put upon you any sort of
insult.

  Perhaps this may appear to you to be only an old wife's tale,
which you will contemn. And there might be reason in your contemning
such tales, if by searching we could find out anything better or
truer: but now you see that you and Polus and Gorgias, who are the
three wisest of the Greeks of our day, are not able to show that we
ought to live any life which does not profit in another world as
well as in this. And of all that has been said, nothing remains
unshaken but the saying, that to do injustice is more to be avoided
than to suffer injustice, and that the reality and not the
appearance of virtue is to be followed above all things, as well in
public as in private life; and that when any one has been wrong in
anything, he is to be chastised, and that the next best thing to a man
being just is that he should become just, and be chastised and
punished; also that he should avoid all flattery of himself as well as
of others, of the few or of the many: and rhetoric and any other art
should be used by him, and all his actions should be done always, with
a view to justice.

  Follow me then, and I will lead you where you will be happy in
life and after death, as the argument shows. And never mind if some
one despises you as a fool, and insults you, if he has a mind; let him
strike you, by Zeus, and do you be of good cheer, and do not mind
the insulting blow, for you will never come to any harm in the
practise of virtue, if you are a really good and true man. When we
have practised virtue together, we will apply ourselves to politics,
if that seems desirable, or we will advise about whatever else may
seem good to us, for we shall be better able to judge then. In our
present condition we ought not to give ourselves airs, for even on the
most important subjects we are always changing our minds; so utterly
stupid are we! Let us, then, take the argument as our guide, which has
revealed to us that the best way of life is to practise justice and
every virtue in life and death. This way let us go; and in this exhort
all men to follow, not in the way to which you trust and in which
you exhort me to follow you; for that way, Callicles, is nothing
worth.

                              -THE END-
.
